Yuu m ce laèa yi yu ba ená ká? Yi yu ená beèe Isráèl wááwá a m koni yuu ce a m ce roèo ese Nyúè ka'. Mú beèe ce Nyúè aè m ce naè a beèe ce a m koni yuu anaè. Nyúè aè m geèe bár beèe a cip btuè'.	What then? That which Israel seeks for, that he didn't obtain, but the chosen ones obtained it, and the rest were hardened.
Beèe mo' ce a m tááte aèfo a ka' yu', a laa enáê, “Yu' neè, e ce ká' AÈlajaè.”	"Some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, ""Behold, he is calling Elijah."""
Jisoès aè ka' yá wa'a, a laa enáê, “Maè'shi neè tá bghaèrbeèe anaè a vú yá máè. Weèe fa jepsi woweèe ka', njobeè' kúú Nyúè yi yu neè beèe ce a yu aèmboè bghaèrbeèe ca.”	"But Jesus said, ""Allow the little children, and don't forbid them to come to me; for the Kingdom of Heaven belongs to ones like these."""
Awá Jisoès a ká' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ wee neè mini-ñwáè máná, ñgwañkúñwáè ce yu ñwáè fuèp na aè fa mbaèa a caa beèe wááwá ce a fa mbaèa njo.	"He called his disciples to himself, and said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you, this poor widow gave more than all those who are giving into the treasury,"
Beèe wááwá a m ba aèfo. Beèe ce a m kweñger njep rdip rgoèr a m fúú enjo. Beèe ce a m kweñger, a ba mbaè yir a vú embaâ, a sa' woweèe, a teni mnsa' ñwáè wááwá aèmboè mi mfaè' mi m ba.	The sea gave up the dead who were in it. Death and Hades gave up the dead who were in them. They were judged, each one according to his works.
Jisoès aè koosïìmnse neè ye, a naa bo a joo ye aègho, a laa enáê, “M koèñ wa'a. Keè'se, ba nrara.”	"Being moved with compassion, he stretched out his hand, and touched him, and said to him, ""I want to. Be made clean."""
Ñkaraè, m ce loo máná aè cu yáánïì, tá yoè buu wááwá ba yáánïì aèmboè yo ntee yi yu yáánïì foñ naè.	Beloved, I pray that you may prosper in all things and be healthy, even as your soul prospers.
Wee bkaŋ bvi yû?	Where are your pans?
Nduunjì ca zhi duŋte.	This road has become uneven.
Jisoès aè ka' niñ aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe aè vúê, a yá ye a bu' mmbo neè ye,	When he came into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, asking him,
E cañ a du entombïì, a ko' mbe ce Sïìkamoè ená Jisoès e ce caèa naè, e bo yá.	He ran on ahead, and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him, for he was to pass that way.
Woweèe a m too Baènabaès ená Siyuès, a too Pol ená Hámáè, njobeè' a ye ce e m ce laèa yi buu goèr.	"They called Barnabas ""Jupiter,"" and Paul ""Mercury,"" because he was the chief speaker."
Woweèe a kútïì a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Weèr rïìñ ka'.” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná má máè be suñ weèe ñwáè ce e fa máè ñger aè rgeèe buu ca ka'.	"They answered Jesus, and said, ""We don't know."" He also said to them, ""Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things."
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ntatap aè laèa embe kaèbaèraè' enáê, “Rla' Nyúè li yu seè'ni ba aè mú beèe. E be cu a woweèe tá woweèe a ba yïì beèe. Nyúè seese be ba a woweèe, ba yaèp Nyúè.	"I heard a loud voice out of heaven saying, ""Behold, God's dwelling is with people, and he will dwell with them, and they will be his people, and God himself will be with them as their God."
E ker ma'shi woweèe mbo, a ker du a ker loo, a ku laa aèmboè e ba laa naè.	He left them again, went away, and prayed a third time, saying the same words.
A ka' fúr beèe anaè embe ndaèp, e niñ mbo, a koo muunje anaè aè boè, e natïì mbekïì.	But when the crowd was put out, he entered in, took her by the hand, and the girl arose.
Yi ka' ba ená Nyúè aè ce woweèe njo' yi ntee boèñboñ baná e ce woweèe ba njo' yuu mo' ce woweèe a geèe ka'. E m ka' ba ce woweèe ba njo' yuu mo' ce woweèe a m geèe, yi ntee boèñboñ anaè aè m ba ba ntee boèñboñ ghup ka'.	And if by grace, then it is no longer of works; otherwise grace is no longer grace. But if it is of works, it is no longer grace; otherwise work is no longer work.
Mɛ̀ cɛr brèreŋ tɛ à bo kupshi koo àgho.	I have cut the bamboos so that you should make a storage barn with them.
Baná m be kuè ce kuushi weèe buu ca aè nfeè' wááwá. Máè rïìñ máná weèe aè rïìñ war buu mini a táá njo tatap.	Therefore I will not be negligent to remind you of these things, though you know them, and are established in the present truth.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès, a duê, a gee yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa neè woweèe.	The disciples went, and did just as Jesus commanded them,
Nïìkoèdámoès foñ ce e m be vú a yá Jisoès neètú' naè, aè m duè a ye, a túr njáèá mcáèp mo' ce a m ce too ená máêr, ba aluès ce a m fïìñshi. Mcáèp anaè mi m ba aèmboè bkiluè mñkyeèe wa'a.	Nicodemus, who at first came to Jesus by night, also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred Roman pounds.
E dù nje làʼ nje Nfò.	He has gone to Nforʼs compound.
E ka' vúè baè' aètútú, yá rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a war,	When he drew near, he saw the city and wept over it,
Buu ce vi m koni beèe eluâuñgoèñ, yu buu ce Nyúè aè m báá woweèe aègho. A m sañ buu ca tá seèe ce seèe ce cu ba aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì na, bo rïìñ, loèr nfeè' faè dïì' buu anaè koni seèe foñ ka'.	Now all these things happened to them by way of example, and they were written for our admonition, on whom the ends of the ages have come.
tá ñwáè ce e ce koèñ aè rba entombïì ba ye ñkwaèa.	Whoever desires to be first among you shall be your bondservant,
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu ñwáè moè'sir, máè byemi máná weèe be yu' buu ce máè laèa na. Ñwáè ce e ce jepsi weèe naè, káè yu nda áè, Tata Nyúè be fa ye ñgá'.	I have confidence toward you in the Lord that you will think no other way. But he who troubles you will bear his judgment, whoever he is.
Yi yu mini ená beèe a be fa ñgá' neè beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès, a ce koèñ aè rcu lap rcu aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ.	Yes, and all who desire to live godly in Christ Jesus will suffer persecution.
Beèe anaè a ka' yá ená ka' Jisoès káè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a yu aèfo ka', woweèe a niñ aè bkeñ anaè a du aè rla' Kaèpanuèm a ce roèo Jisoès.	When the multitude therefore saw that Jesus wasn't there, nor his disciples, they themselves got into the boats, and came to Capernaum, seeking Jesus.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yi yu yi eká aèmboè weèe? Weèe ce laèa ye weená m yu nda?”	"He said to them, ""But who do you say that I am?"""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Hároèd ce e m ce sa' aè ñgoâñ Galeèle aè yu' nsuñ Jisoès,	At that time, Herod the tetrarch heard the report concerning Jesus,
“Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a yu ñgaâa fuèp aè yú', njobeè' kúú Nyúè yu yap.	"Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	4	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce koosimnse, njobeè' a be keèe geèe tá nyor wase woweèe.	Blessed are those who mourn, for they shall be comforted.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	5	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce naèa nyor ka', njobeè' Nyúè be keèe fa ñgoèñ ca neè woweèe.	Blessed are the gentle, for they shall inherit the earth.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	6	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce njeè ce yañ woweèe, ntee yi ce yuushi woweèe aè rgeèe buu ce vi yu yáánïì, njobeè' Nyúè be keèe geèe tá woweèe a yu' rboèñ.	Blessed are those who hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	7	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce koosimnse neè beèe mo', njobeè' a be keèe koosimnse neè woweèe.	Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	8	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce yap ntee yi yu rara, njobeè' woweèe a be keèe yá Nyúè.	Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	9	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce geèe beèe a ce cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè, njobeè' a be keèe too woweèe ená boo Nyúè.	Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called children of God.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	10	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce fa woweèe ñgá' njobeè' woweèe a ce geèe buu ce vi yu yáánïì. Kúú Nyúè yu yap.	Blessed are those who have been persecuted for righteousness' sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	11	Mboâñtu mi yu neè weèe ce beèe a ka' cáp weèe, fa ñgá' neè weèe, ker nya' mnde' laa ku' buu bbebep aèmboè weèe njo' máè.	Blessed are you when people reproach you, persecute you, and say all kinds of evil against you falsely, for my sake."
Yïì ta ba yïì ma a m laèa wa'a njobeè' a m ce wáp Juês. A m ce wáp woweèe njobeè' woweèe a m byemi war aèbee ená ñwáè aè ka' laa ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè, baná a be juèu ñgaèñ embe ndaèp rloo.	His parents said these things because they feared the Jews; for the Jews had already agreed that if any man would confess him as Christ, he would be put out of the synagogue.
a ká' a ce buèu ye aèmboè ñkúú wa'a, a ce laèa enáê, “Nyaèr, ñkwe Juês.” Woweèe a m lïìp ye neè mmbo.	"They kept saying, ""Hail, King of the Jews!"" and they kept slapping him."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, aèmboè weèr ce suñ beèe buu ca, weèr ce suñ ba buu ce beèe a yá'ni weèr neè wap bfee ka'. Weèr ce suñ ba buu ce Yú' Nyúè yi geèe weèr aè rïîñ. Weèr ce yá'ni buu ce aè yú' neè beèe ce a túr Yú' Nyúè njep waâp mntee.	Which things also we speak, not in words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Spirit teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things.
Moè' efa weèe fa yá ñgá' njobeè' e yu ñwáè nyúshi beèe, káè nyáèá, káè ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep, káè njobeè' e ce jepsi ntaè'teè beèe mo' ka'.	For let none of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evil doer, or a meddler in other men's matters.
Ñwáè ce e ka' baa máè, baná e baèa yaè Ta foñ.	He who hates me, hates my Father also.
Ka' m yu aènjïìsaèp efa weèe wa'a, seèe ku ba aèbee aè yú'. AÈ rlii Tata Jisos kraêis, máè sa' war yuu ce ñwáè ca ce geèe, a teni mnsa' anaè aèmboè m yu lá a weâe mú wa'a. Geèe neè ba yuu ce m be suñ weèe na. Kaari neè aèbee mbe dïû' mo'sir. Ya yú' yi be kuè ba a weâe mú.	For I most certainly, as being absent in body but present in spirit, have already, as though I were present, judged him who has done this thing. In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, you being gathered together, and my spirit, with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Weèe ce yá'ni Ñwaâ' Nyúè njobeè' weèe ce kwaè'shi ená yi be geèe tá weèe koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Ku ba ñwaè' anaè ce yi ce suñ aèmboè máè.	"You search the Scriptures, because you think that in them you have eternal life; and these are they which testify about me.
John	Joân	5	40	Geewa'a, weèe aè ku kani ye yu aè rvúè yá máè tá weèe bo koni ryoèñ.	Yet you will not come to me, that you may have life.
John	Joân	5	41	“M ce roèo máná beèe a ku'si máè ka'.	I don't receive glory from men.
John	Joân	5	42	Ka' ba aèmboè weèe, máè rïìñ weèe, a riñ máná weèe koèñ Nyúè neè ye ntee- ñwáè ka'.	But I know you, that you don't have God's love in yourselves.
John	Joân	5	43	Máè vúè ya ba aè rlii yaè Taê, weèe aè konïì máè ka'. Ñwáâ jáá aè ka' vú neè yi tu, a ñwáè ce weèe be koèñ aè rkonïì.	I have come in my Father's name, and you don't receive me. If another comes in his own name, you will receive him.
John	Joân	5	44	Weèe koèñ aè rkuè'si wee mnyor a ke' ce roèo bkuè'sïì ba ese Nyúè ce e yu moè'sir caè'caè' ka'. Baná weèe aè ba byemi neè máè aè njáâá ká?	How can you believe, who receive glory from one another, and you don't seek the glory that comes from the only God?
John	Joân	5	45	Weèe fa kwaè'shi ená ñwáè ce e be loèr weèe aè mnsa' aè bsii Taèr be loèr máè ka'. Be ba Musïìs ce weèe aè láè mmir mbe yeâ nduè naè.	Don't think that I will accuse you to the Father. There is one who accuses you, even Moses, on whom you have set your hope."
“Weèe aè ka' koñ máè, weèe yu' wa blaèa.	If you love me, keep my commandments.
Wètʉʼ moʼ a ke bye mbaa ce koshi mbʉ àgho.	Some witches turn into leopard and catch goats.
Sò du mbǎa.	Let us go there.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce laèa ená e cu aè rraa, baa nfúr yïì, baná ñgaèñ ku cu aè túè'nji.	He who says he is in the light and hates his brother, is in the darkness even until now.
Jisos Kraâis aè m fúr seèe efa bkwaèa faè dïì' seèe bo ker faè' bkwaèa neè yuu mo' ka'. Baná weèe táá tatap. Weèe fa keèr byemi aè rfaè' bkwaèa neè yuu mo' ka'.	Stand firm therefore in the liberty by which Christ has made us free, and don't be entangled again with a yoke of bondage.
Wèr à ruusi bbèʼtè ca.	We have filled these holes.
Túè' aè ka' raa, weèr Pol weèe aè du aè ryá Jáêms, a ka' baè' a yá btu embe cor wááwá a Jáms weèe mbe dïû' mo'sir.	The day following, Paul went in with us to James; and all the elders were present.
Yú' Nyúè anaè yi ke fa beèe ñger aè rgeèe buu ca wááwá. Yi ke fa ñwáè wááwá yuu ce yi ce koèñ aè rfa.	But the one and the same Spirit works all of these, distributing to each one separately as he desires.
M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè weèe wááwá ce weèe yu aè rla' Ruêm, ce Nyúè aè koèñ weèe, a ká' weèe ená weèe ba yïì beèe. M ce loo máná Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta ker ba Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	to all who are in Rome, beloved of God, called to be saints: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Bfúr waê, yu yer dïì' aè ryoèñshi Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá njo' weèe. Yi boèñ ená weèr gee wa'a njobeè' ler rbyemïì li ce tap, a caa aèmboè li m ba, ñwáè wááwá aè ce koèñ nfúr yïì a caa aèmboè e m koèñ.	We are bound to always give thanks to God for you, brothers, even as it is appropriate, because your faith grows exceedingly, and the love of each and every one of you towards one another abounds;
Bkar waê, baná aèmboè weèe cu a ce ke' buu anaè, weèe gheter geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ, e vúè, weèe bo túr faèa moè' a yeâ bsii ka', cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	Therefore, beloved, seeing that you look for these things, be diligent to be found in peace, without blemish and blameless in his sight.
“M yu ñwáè Jus ce a m bi ba aè rla' Tasoès aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè. Geewa'a, máè m kuè' aè rlaâ' aèfa na. Máè m cu njeptii Gaèmalïìyaèl, e yá'nïì máè mncir viseèe btarkú boèñboñ seê, ya ntee yi ce luèu máè aè rduè aèmbuèu Nyúè aèmboè ye foñ yi ce luèu ntïìni na.”	"I am indeed a Jew, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but brought up in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, instructed according to the strict tradition of the law of our fathers, being zealous for God, even as you all are this day.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	4	Máè m fa ñgá' neè beèe enjep nduunjïì Jisoès ca, beèe mo' efa woweèe a kweñgeèr. Máè m koo mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge a fa mbe shañ.	I persecuted this Way to the death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	5	AÈde' tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ker ba ñgaâa kansuèr wááwá a ku suñ weèe ená m ce nya' ba mnde' ka'. Woweèe a rïìñ ená máè m koo mñwaè' ce woweèe a m sañ neè bfúr wap ce aè rla' Daèmaskoès a du aèfo tá m bo duè koo beèe enjep nduunjïì Kraêis, kur vúè aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá a fa woweèe ñgá'.	As also the high priest and all the council of the elders testify, from whom also I received letters to the brothers, and traveled to Damascus to bring them also who were there to Jerusalem in bonds to be punished.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	6	“Máè ka' duè baè' aètútú aèmboè aè nfeè' ce nyúè e ke kuèu ñgoèñ naè, rraa li ku lo a raa embe buèu ená ñwaâñ mbe máâ nduè.	It happened that, as I made my journey, and came close to Damascus, about noon, suddenly there shone from the sky a great light around me.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	7	Máè gwe aè nsheè, a yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ce laèa neè máè enáê, ‘Soêl, Soêl, AÈ ce fa ñgá' neè máè njoká?’	I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me?'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	8	Máè beesïì enáê, ‘Tataê, a wáè nda?’ E laa neè máè enáê, ‘A máè Jisoâs aè rla' Nasaráèt ce a ce jar aègho naè.’	I answered, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said to me, 'I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom you persecute.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	9	Beèe ce weèr woweèe aè m ba a m yá rraa anaè a ke' yu' njeèndoñ ñwáè ce e m ce laèa neè máè na ka'.	Those who were with me indeed saw the light and were afraid, but they didn't understand the voice of him who spoke to me."
Beèe ca a ce feè'shi njobeè' woweèe a koèñ máè. Woweèe a rïìñ ená m yu mbe shañ tá m bo tome Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ.	The former insincerely preach Christ from selfish ambition, thinking that they add affliction to my chains;
Yuu ce yi m geèe woweèe a koosïìmnse seê, aè m ba blaèa ce e m laèa ená woweèe a be keèr yá ye ka' naè. A woweèe a m duè a ba' aègee keñ ñgoèr.	sorrowing most of all because of the word which he had spoken, that they should see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship.
Nyúè ghoni kúú yïìseèe ta Dávïìd ce yi ce vúè na! Seèe ku'si Nyúè embe buèu!”	"Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is coming in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"""
Muu à gwè, banɛ à naa ye mbekì.	The child has fallen, so you should lift him up.
Duè neè ñkaè' anaè. M be duè ya yu ñkaè' anaè ka', njobeè' yaè nfeè' aè be gháá ka'.”	"You go up to the feast. I am not yet going up to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled."""
njobeè' aè be ba yïì ñwáè ce aè be suñ beèe wááwá buu ce wáè yá a ker yu'.	For you will be a witness for him to all men of what you have seen and heard.
Cena yu ba rfaè' Nyúè. E m geèe seèe woweèe aè kútïì aèbee njo' Kraêis, a fa weèr rfaè' ená weèr suñ beèe ená aède' a Nyúè weèe a kútïì aèbee.	But all things are of God, who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ, and gave to us the ministry of reconciliation;
“Musïìs ca ce woweèe a m máñni a laa enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce e geèe ená aè ba mbe weâr nduè, sa' weèr aè geèe nda’ naè, Nyúè aè m tuu ye ená e ba ñwáè rsa', ker ba ñwáè nfúr beèe efa ñgá'. E m caèasi ntuu neè ye mbe mmbo yïì ncïìndap ce e m nyáá nje múè mcuèñ mor mbe mú ce mo' naè.	"This Moses, whom they refused, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge?'--God has sent him as both a ruler and a deliverer by the hand of the angel who appeared to him in the bush.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	36	E m fúr woweâe aè to' Ijïìp. E m geèe buu bghagha' ba buu bbáèá aè to' Ijïìp, ba aèwaâa rdip rbeer, ker ba aè rïìñ aè bfeè' mñkyeèe.	This man led them out, having worked wonders and signs in Egypt, in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness for forty years.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	37	Musïìs ca a ñwáè ce e m laèa neè boo Isráèl enáê, ‘Nyúè be fúr ñwáè ntuu neè weèe efa múè bfúr wee aèmboè e m fúr máè’ naè.	This is that Moses, who said to the children of Israel, 'The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	38	A ye ce e m ba aè múè beèe Nyúè ce a m kaari aè rïìñ, a ba a ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m laèa neè ye mbe rtuèu Sinaèi, a ba a viseèe bta foñ. E m koo blaâa bteèe tá e bo fa neè seèe.	This is he who was in the assembly in the wilderness with the angel that spoke to him on Mount Sinai, and with our fathers, who received living oracles to give to us,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	39	Viseèe bta a m koèñ aè ryu'ni neè ye ka', a doori ye aè geñ, a kúti aè to' Ijïìp enjep ntee.	to whom our fathers wouldn't be obedient, but rejected him, and turned back in their hearts to Egypt,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	40	Woweèe a m laèa neè Ároèn enáê, ‘Geèe mnyúè neè weèr tá vi bo keè'ni weèr duè aègho. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè Musïìs ca ce e m fúr weâr aè to' Ijïìp na, weèr rïìñ yuu ce yi koni ye ka'.’	saying to Aaron, 'Make us gods that will go before us, for as for this Moses, who led us out of the land of Egypt, we don't know what has become of him.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	41	Woweèe a kupshïì mú muu naè' neè bco' aè nfeè' anaè, a gee tañshïì neè yaèp nyúè anaè, a lu'shi neè yuu ce map mmbo mi m geèe.	They made a calf in those days, and brought a sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	42	“Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè beesïì yïì njïì neè woweèe, a ma'shi woweèe a ce caè'ni buu embe buèu aèmboè a sañ mbe ñwaâ' ñgaâa ntuu Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, ‘Ndap Isráèl, waè' weèe aè m sháshi mnyaèa a gee tañshïì aègho ba neè máè aè bfeè' mñkyeèe aè rïìñ a? Yi yu wa' ka'.	But God turned, and gave them up to serve the army of the sky, as it is written in the book of the prophets, 'Did you offer to me slain animals and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	43	Weèe aè m byáè' taâp Moloèk ba rkaèñsïû Ráfaèn ce aè m ba buu ce weèe aè m geèe tá weèe bo caè'ni. Baná m be fúr weèe duè aègho caèa aè rla' Babiloèn.’	You took up the tabernacle of Moloch, the star of your god Rephan, the figures which you made to worship. I will carry you away beyond Babylon.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	44	“Wer bta a m túr taèp ce yi ce duèñshi ená Nyúè aè ye leè' a yïì beèe naè, aè rïìñ. Yi m ku ba aèmboè Nyúè aè m laèa neè Musïìs ená e ba'rïî, a duñshi ye njáèá njïì ce e ba'ri naè.	Our fathers had the tabernacle of the testimony in the wilderness, even as he who spoke to Moses commanded him to make it according to the pattern that he had seen;"
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè weèr Tata Jisoès yu aèbee na, máè riñ neè mini-ñwáè ená njáèá byee mo' vi yu ce aède' ñwáè buu efa rye ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, ñwáè aè ka' byemi ená njáèá byee mo' vi boèñ aè rye ka', baná byee anaè vi yu boèñboñ neè ye ka'.	I know, and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of itself; except that to him who considers anything to be unclean, to him it is unclean.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân aè ka' yu' wa'a, a du a lor gúèú a tuñ.	When his disciples heard this, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a tomb.
Tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe yi m ce koèñ aè rjaè' Pol efa rkwe, a kani woweèe efa ryúshi ñgaâa shañ. E m laèa ená beèe ce a rïìñ aè rbu' rdip a nyáá coo njep roè entombïì bu' rdip, du nje waa ñkúè.	But the centurion, desiring to save Paul, stopped them from their purpose, and commanded that those who could swim should throw themselves overboard first to go toward the land;
Jisoès aè ker laa yi yu yuu ka'. Pailáèt aè bááñgeèr seê.	But Jesus made no further answer, so that Pilate marveled.
Bbep vi bòŋ kaʼ.	Wild behaviour is not good.
Wèr à lɛɛte à rzhe msur.	We are accustomed to eat pepper.
Yú' Nyúè foñ yi ce jaè' seèe ce seèe yu neè bsáè-ñwáè, njobeè' seèe rïìñ aè rloo aèmboè seèe aè ba loo ka'. Yú' anaè yi ke bu' mmbo neè Nyúè a seâe btuè neè rwarñgeèr-ñwáè, aè njïì ce aède' ñwáè laa ka'.	In the same way, the Spirit also helps our weaknesses, for we don't know how to pray as we ought. But the Spirit himself makes intercession for us with groanings which can't be uttered.
Woowèe a ce zhe ba kɛ?	What are they eating?
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Weèe ku ce koèñ aè ryá mncoèo ba buu bbáèá ka' byemi neè máè.”	"Jesus therefore said to him, ""Unless you see signs and wonders, you will in no way believe."""
Ñwáè aè ka' gee rfaè', a la' ye, baná mbaèa ce a laè' ye aègho anaè yu yïì ce a fa ye fa ka', njobeè' e faè' a ka' koni.	Now to him who works, the reward is not counted as grace, but as something owed.
Nyʉ̀ à fa sèe buu jɛɛjɛ̀ɛjɛɛ.	God has given us different gifts.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, bfúr weêr, Tata Nyúè aè koèñ weèe. Yu yer dïì' aè ryoèñshi Nyúè aè njáèá beèe ce weèe yu njobeè' Nyúè aè m ce weèe efa rkáè' tá weèe bo koni ryoèñ. Weèe aè m koni ryoèñ ca njïì enjep yú' Nyúè. Yi m geèe weèe aè ba brara, ker byemi blaâa mini ce weèe aè m byemi aègho.	But we are bound to always give thanks to God for you, brothers loved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation through sanctification of the Spirit and belief in the truth;
A ŋgwe ce e ba koo mbʉ nà na.	This is the dog which caught the goat.
Bfúr ce a m ba aè rla' Listraè ba IÌkonïìyoèm a m laèa buu bboèñboñ aèmboè ye seê.	The brothers who were at Lystra and Iconium gave a good testimony about him.
M ̀ be tɛɛ njìnsaʼ nè wɛ̀.	I will be your witness.
E ka' maè'shi beèe, niñ mbe ndaèp, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bipshïì neè ye ená ñgaèa anaè yu ená ká lá.	When he had entered into a house away from the multitude, his disciples asked him about the parable.
Beèe a lo a ba bcuèu jáá jáèá jáá njo' ye.	So there arose a division in the multitude because of him.
Ŋwɛɛ Ŋkep Bkwâa [ŋwɛ̄ː ŋkēp bkwâː] cn 7.	month of August.
weèe ker byemi ená e ja' yïì ma ba yïì ta aègho ka'.	then you no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother,
Mɛ̀ gèe enɛ cê, a kaʼ yɛ ye.	I have struggled with difficulties before seeing him.
ce e m loèr a gee Jisos Kraâis aè fúú efa rkwe, e lor ye a cuusi a yeâ rkoo maè' mbe buèu.	which he worked in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and made him to sit at his right hand in the heavenly places,
Le rboèñ li fa loè ba efa btu ce weèe ce ba', ba bsa', ba bcáè' ce weèe ce suèsi nyor aègho tá beèe a bo yá naè ka'.	Let your beauty be not just the outward adorning of braiding the hair, and of wearing jewels of gold, or of putting on fine clothing;
Sò seesi àmbò sò be fàʼ.	Let us discuss how we will work.
Woweèe a ká' a ce koosimnse, a ce bipshi neè ye moè'sir moè'sir enáê, “Waè' yu máè a?”	"They began to be sorrowful, and to ask him one by one, ""Surely not I?"" And another said, ""Surely not I?"""
Beèe ce e m tuu naè a du a yá buu aè ku ba aèmboè e m suñ woweèe naè.	Those who were sent went away, and found things just as he had told them.
Rkoèñnïì li yu ená seèe ce gee buu ce Nyúè ce laèa. AÈmboè weèe aè m yu' efa rkáè', yuu ce e laèa yi yu ená weèe cu neè rkoèñnïì-ñwáè.	This is love, that we should walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, even as you heard from the beginning, that you should walk in it.
E ka' yu' wa'a, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Beèe ce a ke roèo ñwáè ncáèp e ke ba ñgaâa byañ, ke' ba beâe btatap ka'. Máè vúè aè rká' beâe byáánïì ka'. Máè vúè aè rká' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"When Jesus heard it, he said to them, ""Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."""
Beèe eluâuñgoèñ ca a m ku byemi neè Nyúè caar a kweñger, a koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè woweèe naè ka'. Woweèe a m ku yá buu anaè aè njïìsaèp seê, a lu'shi, a laa ená woweèe a yu bkïìloè njep ñgoèñ na.	These all died in faith, not having received the promises, but having seen them and embraced them from afar, and having confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth.
E ma' ñgaèa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè mbaèa moè' aè m túr yi nsuu, byee vi ku' aè nsuu anaè boèñboñ seê.	"He spoke a parable to them, saying, ""The ground of a certain rich man brought forth abundantly."
Ñwáè ce e doèoshi weèe, weèe aè ka' ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe ca aè doèoshi Nyúè ce e m ká' weèe ená tá weèe ba yïì beèe ka'.	This persuasion is not from him who calls you.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' lor soo ká' rfaè', ker ce keè' mbenjïì, baná ñgaèñ aè ghááte aè rgeèe rfaè' ce li kuèu kúú Nyúè ka'.”	"But Jesus said to him, ""No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the Kingdom of God."""
E lor bráâd taê, ba nca baa caè, a ke' mbe buèu, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi bráêd, a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a gapshi neè beèe anaè, a ceeshi nca anaè foñ a gapshi neè woweèe.	He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed and broke the loaves, and he gave to his disciples to set before them, and he divided the two fish among them all.
M ce laèa ba ená weèe fa goèr seê, lo bá buu, tá beèe mo' a bo yu' rboèñ aègho ka'. M ce laèa ba ená beèe wááwá a túr yuu ce yi gháá woweèe, tá beèe wááwá a bo ba yáánïì, tá moè' buu yuu ka'.	For this is not that others may be eased and you distressed,
“Bfeè' mo' vi ka' caèa, máè lo a vúâ a máâ to' tá m bo jaè' ñgaâa ñgá' neè mbaèa, keèr fa rfa neè Nyúè.	Now after some years, I came to bring gifts for the needy to my nation, and offerings;
Baná mluè mi fa ce koo weèe aè buu ceâ aèyaèñseè ka'. Be ba aèyaèñseè tá buu ku ba ce mluè mi koo weèe aègho. Ñgá' ñwáè ce aè noâñ mo'sir aè ghááte neè ñgaèñ aè noèñ anaè.	Therefore don't be anxious for tomorrow, for tomorrow will be anxious for itself. Each day's own evil is sufficient.
AÈ m ba nfeè' anaè Jisoès aè ce jáèr nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, a caa aè ñkúè msañ moè'. Njeè aè m ce yañ ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu. Woweèe a tee btu msañ a ce ye.	At that time, Jesus went on the Sabbath day through the grain fields. His disciples were hungry and began to pluck heads of grain and to eat.
Ka' cu, Jisoès aè tarteè a woweèe, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè caè'ni weèe.” Woweèe a du a gwe njep yeâ tïìi, a gú'shi neè ye.	"As they went to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus met them, saying, ""Rejoice!"" They came and took hold of his feet, and worshiped him."
tá a ye a ba aè ñwáè moè'sir. Baná woweèe a ker ba a baa ka', a yu ba ñwáè moè'sir.	and the two will become one flesh, so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
M ce laèa neè boo mnsuènsuè foñ máná woweèe a yu'ni neè bleebeèe. Baná weèe wááwá lor weêe btu aèmboè bkwaèa, ce fa' a weâe mú. Nyúè e ke fa ñgá' neè ñgaâa naèatu, duñshi yi ntee boèñboñ neè beèe ce a ce naèa tu ka'.	"Likewise, you younger ones, be subject to the elder. Yes, all of you clothe yourselves with humility, to subject yourselves to one another; for ""God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble."""
Yɛkɛ ce tʉʉ shà njep rghii.	Yeke is pounding corn beer in the mortar.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a ce duè aè rla' Jáèrikuè, a ka' baè' aè nduunjïì, a gwe mbe mmbo ñgaâa byáèá. Ñgaâa byáèá anaè a fapshïì buu ese ye wááwá, a lip ye, a cañse a duse, e noñ mbo a ba yïû ñkwe.	"Jesus answered, ""A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and he fell among robbers, who both stripped him and beat him, and departed, leaving him half dead."
Beèe wááwá a be baèa weèe njo' máè.	You will be hated by all men for my name's sake.
Fa kúsi neè yuu bebep neè yuu bebep ka'. Gheèter neè gee ba buu ce vi be ba yáánïì aè bsii beèe wááwá.	Repay no one evil for evil. Respect what is honorable in the sight of all men.
Máè rïìñ ye ñgeèe. Máè rïìñ máná weèe koèñ máè, a riñ máná weèe ku táá njep le rbyemïì, a riñ rfaè' ce weèe ce geèe, a riñ máná weèe ce kur ntee seê. Máè rïìñ máná ñgeèe ce weèe ce geèe seè'ni na yi boèñ a caa yïì ce weèe aè m ce geèe entoèmbïì.	"I know your works, your love, faith, service, patient endurance, and that your last works are more than the first.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	20	Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè geèe yuu mo', aè ba yuu ce máè koèñ ka'. Weèe aè maè'shi njeñwáè ce a ce too ená Jáèsábáèl naè a weâe mú. E ce loèr ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè. AÈmboè e ce loèr wa' naè, a ce bo' yaè beèe ená woweèe a ce sakïî, ker ce ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na.	But I have this against you, that you tolerate your woman, Jezebel, who calls herself a prophetess. She teaches and seduces my servants to commit sexual immorality, and to eat things sacrificed to idols.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	21	Máè fa ye mú nfeè' moè' ená e borni bsaèkïì, e kanïì.	I gave her time to repent, but she refuses to repent of her sexual immorality.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	22	M be geèe tá e yañ, noèñ mbe bkuu; tá beèe ce a woweèe a ce saèki a yá mluè seê, ce woweèe a ka' tá kupse, borni buu ce a njeñwáè ca weèe a ce geèe na ka'.	Behold, I will throw her into a bed, and those who commit adultery with her into great oppression, unless they repent of her works.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	23	M be yúshi beèe ce a ce duè a yeâ mbuèu tá bcor wááwá vi bo rïìñ ená m rïìñ buu ce beèe a ke kwaè'shi. M be laè' weèe wááwá aèmboè me mfaè' mi yu.	I will kill her children with Death, and all the assemblies will know that I am he who searches the minds and hearts. I will give to each one of you according to your deeds.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	24	“‘AÈ ka' ba aèmboè bár beâe aè to' Taèitiraè ce a byemi ryá'nïì njeñwáè anaè ka', a ke' riñ yap yu buu bbebep ce beèe a ce too ená a buu Sataèn ce vi yu btatap se naè ka', m ker túr ncep moè' ce m fa neè woweèe ka'.	But to you I say, to the rest who are in Thyatira, as many as don't have this teaching, who don't know what some call 'the deep things of Satan,' to you I say, I am not putting any other burden on you.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	25	Yuu ce aède' m laa yi ku ba ba ená weèe ku ce gee ba buu ce weèe aè yá'ni a ce geèe naè caar tá m ke vúè.	Nevertheless, hold that which you have firmly until I come.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	26	Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap, caa rmoèoshïì, ku ce geèe ba yuu ce yi boèñ máè caar du ba' aèlúèsimbuèu, baná m be fa ye ñger mbenduè bto' wááwá,	He who overcomes, and he who keeps my works to the end, to him I will give authority over the nations.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	27	aèmboè yaè ta ye ye aè fa máè ñger mbenduè mo naè. Ñwáè anaè be loèr mbaèñ kúú ce a geèe neè bco', sa' bto' anaè aègho. E be bú'shi bto' aèmboè a ke bú' rkïìñ li bú'ñger aè bsásáp aè bsásáp naè.	He will rule them with a rod of iron, shattering them like clay pots; as I also have received of my Father:
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	28	M be fa ñwáè anaè njáèá rkaèñsïì ce a ke too ená mbeèr naè.	and I will give him the morning star.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	29	Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	1	Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Sadïìs enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáè ce e túr Byú' Nyúè ce vi yu saèambaê, a ker túr mkaèñsïì saèambaê. Máè rïìñ ye ñgeèe. Beèe a ce loèr yap ená weèe yu beâe bteèe, geewa'a weèe aè ba ba bgúâú beèe.	And to the angel of the assembly in Sardis write: ""He who has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven stars says these things: ""I know your works, that you have a reputation of being alive, but you are dead."
Beèe anaè a bááñgeèr, a ce bipshi a waâp mú enáê, “Yu ba njáèá ká ce yi koni na?” Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “Cena yu ryá'nïì ce rfi ce li túr ñger mo'. E ce laèa neè byú' bbebep vi ce yu'ni neè ye.”	"They were all amazed, so that they questioned among themselves, saying, ""What is this? A new teaching? For with authority he commands even the unclean spirits, and they obey him!"""
E kanïì, a fa ye ba aè shañ ená e keèe laè' yi mbaèa wáá ka' fúú embo.	He would not, but went and cast him into prison, until he should pay back that which was due.
Ñwáè moè' efa múè kúr beèe caè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, laèa tá nfúraè gap bti' weèr ye.”	"One of the multitude said to him, ""Teacher, tell my brother to divide the inheritance with me."""
Ñwáâ mboèñmboñ e ke fúr buu bboèñboñ efa buu bboèñboñ ce vi yu njep yeâ ntee, ñwáâ mbembep fúr buu bbebep efa buu bbebep ce vi yu njep yeâ ntee.	The good man out of his good treasure brings out good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings out evil things.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' woweèe a m koèñ mini ca ka', Nyúè ce geèe woweèe a ce jep, a ce koñ ba mnde'.	Because of this, God sends them a working of error, that they should believe a lie;
Woweèe a m laèa wa'a njobeè' beèe wááwá aè rla' Atáèns ker ba bkïìloè ce a m ce cu aèfo a m loèr ku' yaèp nfeè' a ce geèe kïìnfáèr ba aèmboè buu bfi, a ker ce yu' buu bfi.	Now all the Athenians and the strangers living there spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing.
Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “AÈde' weèr no.” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe be no enjep ndoñ ce m be no enjo, koo njáèá baèptir ce m be koo.	"They said to him, ""We are able."" Jesus said to them, ""You shall indeed drink the cup that I drink, and you shall be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with;"
E m laèa neè woweèe ená a ma'shi tá a btu efa waâp mú a du aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, ka' ba ená e geèe yuu mo' bebep, tá woweèe a bo laèa yuu ce a túr aè rlaèa kuu ye.	"Let them therefore, said he, ""that are in power among you go down with me, and if there is anything wrong in the man, let them accuse him."""
Woweèe a ke'seè ñgoèñ, a ker yá ñwáè moè' caa efa Jisoès ka'.	Suddenly looking around, they saw no one with them any more, except Jesus only.
E m laèa yuu mo' neè woweèe, buu efa rmaè' ba ñgaèa ka', e ba a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe, sar buu wááwá neè woweèe.	Without a parable he didn't speak to them; but privately to his own disciples he explained everything.
“Mdoñ rúú ce wáè yá naè, yu bkúú rúú ce a bii ka' ko' mbe kúú. A be ghar woweèe wáá, tá woweèe a sa' a nyaèa anaè weèe aèbee nfeè' múcaèr seê.	The ten horns that you saw are ten kings who have received no kingdom as yet, but they receive authority as kings, with the beast, for one hour.
M be ba taèr neè weèe tá weèe ba boo wa, boo mmbañruè ba boo bbyeèñge. Cena aè laèa Tata ce e túr buu wááwá.”	"I will be to you a Father. You will be to me sons and daughters,' says the Lord Almighty."""
Máè m yu' nsuñ ca ba ekuèè cuèu ñwáè ka'. AÈ m yá'ni ñwáè a yá'ni máè nsuñ ca ka'. Yu ba Jisos Kraâis ce e m geèe máè riñ buu ca.	For neither did I receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it came to me through revelation of Jesus Christ.
Jisos Kraâis ca aè m fa yïì nyor aè rtee beèe wááwá efa yaèp ñgá'. Yuu ce e m geèe na yi ce duèñshi ená Nyúè aè m ce koèñ aè rgeèe tá beèe wááwá a luêñ. Cena yi ku koni ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m láè.	who gave himself as a ransom for all; the testimony in its own times;
E lor woweèe a fúú aègho efa múè rla', a du a ba' aèwaâa rla' Bátanïì. E ka' baè', a naa mi mmbo mbekïì, a ghoni woweèe.	He led them out as far as Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them.
Yi yu foñ ená tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì yi m ce niñ mbe dïû' rara, du mbe dïû' rara ce yi m caèa ñger naè nfeè' moè'sir aè bfeè' wááwá. E m ce duè mbo wa'a, du ba neè bláá ce vi m fúú enje nyoèr nje ye ka'. Jisos Kraâis aè m duè yi ba mbe dïû' rara embe buèu, a lor yïì nyor a gee tañshi aègho nfeè' moè'sir caè'caè'.	nor yet that he should offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the holy place year by year with blood not his own,
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè ba ñgaâa ke'ni Ndap Nyúè a m koo Jisoès a kur,	So the detachment, the commanding officer, and the officers of the Jews, seized Jesus and bound him,
Caè'ni neè Fïìlologïìs ba Juèliyaè, ba Nárïìyoès a njar yïì, ba OÈlipaès ba beèe Nyúè wááwá ce a yu a woweèe.	Greet Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the saints who are with them.
Háèsïìkayaè aè m bi Maènasïìs, Maènasïìs aè bi Amoèn, Amoèn aè bi Joèsayaè.	Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh. Manasseh became the father of Amon. Amon became the father of Josiah.
Yaè Ta ce e m tuu máè aè laèa yuu a kuu máè foñ. Weèe aè m be yu' yïì njeèndoñ ka', a be yá ye ka'.	The Father himself, who sent me, has testified about me. You have neither heard his voice at any time, nor seen his form.
Waè' aède' ñwáè soogáè ce taèr buu enjep mmboè ka' ce yeñger a? Waè' aède' ñwáè nfaè' byee lo buu efa rye byee ce e faè' a? Mboè beèe ce a ke cïìñ naè' a ke kaa mmbee naè' ce a ce cïìñ, no a?	What soldier ever serves at his own expense? Who plants a vineyard, and doesn't eat of its fruit? Or who feeds a flock, and doesn't drink from the flock's milk?
gwaète ye aè btete aè btete, fa ye dïì' ba aè múè beèe ce a yu ñgaâa bo' wap btu. Beèe a be ce warse ce kúr msoèñ aèfo.	and will cut him in pieces, and appoint his portion with the hypocrites. There is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.
Mbàa zhi sɛ̀ mɛ̀ efa ryuu cɛ̀ʼ moʼ.	I am running short of money to buy another cloth.
Bfúr waê, ñgoèñ yi ka' baa weèe, weèe fa ba neè rgha'nïì-ñwáè ka'.	Don't be surprised, my brothers, if the world hates you.
Mɛ̀ dù à rcàʼ mbì.	I went to search for a kola nut.
Wèe ce làa enɛ m fa nè wèe àtu kɛ?	Why are you saying that I should give it to you?
AÈde' beèe a kanïì ená buu ce vi kuèu Nyúè, ce e múè' miseèe mmir seèe aè yá naè vi buu efa rba bghagha' ka'. E m vúè aèmboè ñwáè, beèe a yá ye. Yú' Nyúè yi m duèñshi ená yi yu yáánïì. Bcïìndap Nyúè a m yá ye. Beèe a m feè'shi aèmboè ye aè bto' wááwá. Ñgoèñ ca yi m byemi neè ye. Nyúè aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe buèu, e cu mbo neè foèo-ñwáè.	Without controversy, the mystery of godliness is great: God was revealed in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, and received up in glory.
Beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ke duè yap ba aèmbuèu buu ca, yeè Ta embe buèu aè rïìñ ená weèe aè ba túr buu ca.	For the Gentiles seek after all these things; for your heavenly Father knows that you need all these things.
Caè'ni neè Máèári ce e m faè' neè weèe tatap se naè.	Greet Mary, who labored much for us.
Woweèe a ka' vúè yá Jisoès, a laa neè ye enáê, “Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe aè tuu weèr ená weèr vú yá wáè, bipshi neè wáè ená a wáè ñwáè ce yi m ba ená e be vúè naè káè weèr cu ce ke' ba ñwáâ jáá lá?”	"When the men had come to him, they said, ""John the Baptizer has sent us to you, saying, 'Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?'"""
E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Keèr du aè mnduunjïì aè múè rla' ker ba aè mú mnduunjïû aè mñkúè, koo beèe aè ñger, tá a vúê, tá yaè ndap bo ruu.	"The lord said to the servant, 'Go out into the highways and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
Luke	Luêk	14	24	M ce suñ weèe máná aède' moè' efa beèe ce a be anaè joo yuu kuè cuèu aè ya ñkaè' ka'.’”	For I tell you that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper.'"
Máè m sañ mbe ñwaè' ce máè m sañ neè weèe naè ená weèe fa keè kar weèe beèe ce a ce saèki ka'.	I wrote to you in my letter to have no company with sexual sinners;
Noèñ anaè yi be gháá tá weèe riñ ená m yu njep yaè Taê, weèe aè ba njep máè, má máè aè ba njep weèe.	In that day you will know that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce weèe aè m rïìñ Nyúè ka' naè, weèe aè m ba bkwaèa neè buu ce yu mnyúè ka'.	However at that time, not knowing God, you were in bondage to those who by nature are not gods.
Zhi bòŋ à rbèenjiǹsa mnàŋ kaʼ.	It is not good to bear false witness.
Wáâ Timotïì ce aè yu muu waè, Nyúè aè túr wáè aè ntee boèñboñ. Wáè konïì sá' efa gho njo' Jisos Kraêis. Baná aè táá tatap.	You therefore, my child, be strengthened in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Buu ce ñwáè aè m be yá káè yu' ka', ker ba buu ce ñwáè aè m be kwa'shi ka', Nyúè aè kupshi vi, a lá neè beèe ce a koèñ ye.”	"But as it is written, ""Things which an eye didn't see, and an ear didn't hear, which didn't enter into the heart of man, these God has prepared for those who love him."""
Pol aè ka' yá wa'a, weèr aè roo nduunjïì aè rduè aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè, njobeè' weèr aè m rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená Nyúè aè ká' weèr ená weèr fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè woweèe.	When he had seen the vision, immediately we sought to go out to Macedonia, concluding that the Lord had called us to preach the Good News to them.
Mɛ̀ mʉ toshi bwǎa ŋkaʼ nè ŋkùr.	I burnt the sides of the fence yesterday.
Ñgaâa mfaè' mo' a ka' yá yuu ce yi m koni na, yi bep woweèe seê, woweèe a duê, a suñ yaèp masaè buu wááwá ce vi m koni anaè.	So when his fellow servants saw what was done, they were exceedingly sorry, and came and told to their lord all that was done.
Seèe riñ ená seèe aè fúú efa ñgúè' rkwe a ba aè ñgúè' ryoèñ njobeè' seèe koèñ bfúr viseèe. Ñwáè ce e baèa bfúr yïì, ñgaèñ yu ñwáè ce e kwe.	We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. He who doesn't love his brother remains in death.
Woowèe a yɛ nè map mmir.	They saw it themselves.
Bár beèe ce a m be naè, a koo ñgaâa mfaè' anaè, a fa ñgá' neè woweèe, a yúshi woweèe.	and the rest grabbed his servants, and treated them shamefully, and killed them.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ ená yïì Ta aè m fa buu wááwá mbe yeâ mmboè. E m rïìñ foñ ená e m loâ ese Nyúè, a ce kúti aè ryá Nyúè,	Jesus, knowing that the Father had given all things into his hands, and that he came forth from God, and was going to God,
Beèe mo' a m byemi yuu ce e m laèa, beèe mo' a byemi yap yu ka'.	Some believed the things which were spoken, and some disbelieved.
AÈde' yuu ce yi yu bebep aè bsii Nyúè yi ker ba ka'. Yuu ce yi be ba aè rla' anaè be ba kaèbaèraè' ce túr Nyúè ba muu njeèe. Yïì beèe ce a ce duè a yeâ mbuèu a be gú'shi neè ye aè rla' anaè.	There will be no curse any more. The throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his servants serve him.
Simïìyoèn aè koo muu mbe mboè, a yoñshi Nyúè a laa enáê,	then he received him into his arms, and blessed God, and said,
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe yu ndúè' beèe ce Nyúè aè ce, a ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a ce faè' neè ñkúú, a ba to' rara, a ba beèe vi Nyúè, tá weèe bo suñ aèmboè buu bboèñboñ ce Nyúè aè geèe. Yu ye ce e ká' weèe a fúr weèe efa túè'nji, weèe aè ba seè'ni ba aè li rraa ce li boèñ seê.	But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for God's own possession, that you may proclaim the excellence of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light:
Tá Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, ba Tata Jisos Kraêis, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ ker fa wee cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ,
Ntee yi ka' ce luèu weèe aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ, ñwáè ce aède' e gee yuu bebep neè weèe ba nda?	Now who is he who will harm you, if you become imitators of that which is good?
Njáèá bbyeèñge anaè a koèñ aè ryá'ni buu seê, a ce gheèter seê, a ke' riñ yuu mini ka'.	always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
njobeè' e m túr muunje moè'sir caè'caè', e ce yañ, a ba yïû ñkwe. Muu anaè aè m ba aèmboè bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú wa'a. Jisoès aè ka' naèti ce duè, beèe a fateè ye mbetar.	for he had an only daughter, about twelve years of age, and she was dying. But as he went, the multitudes pressed against him.
Weèr ce sañ buu ca tá seèe bo ruu neè rlu'shïì.	And we write these things to you, that our joy may be fulfilled.
a m sañ njo' seèe foñ. Tata Nyúè be yá seèe aèmboè beâe byáánïì, ce seèe ka' byemi neè ye ce e m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe.	but for our sake also, to whom it will be accounted, who believe in him who raised Jesus, our Lord, from the dead,
Ñwáè e ke laèa li ce e m be yá'ni ka', ja' ba yi tu. Ñwáè e ke cep ntuu Nyúè, ja' ñgaâa cor wááwá.	He who speaks in another language edifies himself, but he who prophesies edifies the assembly.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr anaè a m roèo aè rkoo Jisoès, njobeè' woweèe a m yi ená e m maè' ñgaèa ca ba neè woweèe. Geewa'a woweèe a m wáp beèe, a ma'shi Jisoès a duse.	They tried to seize him, but they feared the multitude; for they perceived that he spoke the parable against them. They left him, and went away.
Fa kèr jɛ̀r njìnjì kaʼ.	Donʼt walk backwards again.
E laa neè vi enáê, “Duè neè.” Byú' anaè vi fúú a du a niñ njep ñkuânyaèm anaè, kúr ñkuânyaèm anaè wááwá yi káátïì a cañ a du mbaè baa, a gweñger njep roè, a no mdip a kweñger.	"He said to them, ""Go!"" They came out, and went into the herd of pigs: and behold, the whole herd of pigs rushed down the cliff into the sea, and died in the water."
E ka' duâ baè' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a koñ aè rba a beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès naè aèbee. Woweèe wááwá a m wáp ye, njobeè' woweèe a m byemi ená e yu moè' efa múè beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès ka'.	When Saul had come to Jerusalem, he tried to join himself to the disciples; but they were all afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple.
Bfúr ca a ka' rïìñ wa'a, a lor ye a du aègho aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, a ma'shi ye, e natïì a du aè rla' Tasoès.	When the brothers knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him off to Tarsus.
Beèe aè m kaari aè mú mla' ce mi m ba aègee rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a vú neè yaèp beèe ce a m ce yañse, ker ba beèe ce byú' bbebep vi m ce fa woweèe ñgá', Pitaè weèe a gee woweèe wááwá a luêñ.	Multitudes also came together from the cities around Jerusalem, bringing sick people, and those who were tormented by unclean spirits: and they were all healed.
Woweèe a koo Soèstánïì ce e m ba tu embe ndaèp rloo a lip aè bsii koêr. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Gaèliyoè aè m loèr yuu ce woweèe a m geèe anaè aè yuu ka'.	Then all the Greeks laid hold on Sosthenes, the ruler of the synagogue, and beat him before the judgment seat. Gallio didn't care about any of these things.
Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè Tata Jisos Kraêis, aè ba ye ce beèe a be ce yoèñshi aè nfeè' sïìp, rïìñ ená m ce nya' mnde' ka'.	The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, he who is blessed forevermore, knows that I don't lie.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Feleêp, seèe aè cu teèteè wa'a, wáè ke' riñ máè ka' lá? Ñwáè ce e ka' yá máè, baná e yá yaè Taê. Wáè ka' ker ce laèa ená m duñshi wáè yaè Ta njoká?	"Jesus said to him, ""Have I been with you such a long time, and do you not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. How do you say, 'Show us the Father?'"
Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèr ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca aè bdïì' mo' foñ, ke' ce naèa tu aè rfaè' ce ñwáè moè' aè geèe fa yeâ ñkúè ka'.	so as to preach the Good News even to the parts beyond you, not to boast in what someone else has already done.
Ŋkʉʉ ca kòŋ fòo sê.	This chief likes majesty a lot.
Bdikïìn foñ a túr aè rba beèe ce a ke loèr buu aètáèr ka', keèr ba foñ beèe ce a nya' mnde' ka'. Woweèe a túr aè rba beèe ce a ce no mruè' goèr ka', káè beèe ce a roñ mbaèa ka'.	Servants, in the same way, must be reverent, not double-tongued, not addicted to much wine, not greedy for money;
Ñgaâa ntuu ce Joân aè m tuu naè a ka' duè, Jisoès aè ká' a ce suñ ku' kúr beèe ca buu kuu Joân. E m laèa enáê, “Weèe aè m fúú a du aè rïìñ ba aè ryá ká? Weèe aè m duè aè ryá aèmboè fu' yi ce cïì' ñke' a?	"When John's messengers had departed, he began to tell the multitudes about John, ""What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?"
Weâe mnfeèp ce a ce duèñshi beèe nduunjïì! Wee ke kaèr buu wááwá ce wee ke no, faè dïì' weèe no mú yuu teèe njo ka', ce mïì juè'.	You blind guides, who strain out a gnat, and swallow a camel!
Weèe ce yúshi beèe njobeè' weèe ce roèo aè rtúr buu ce weèe túr ka', weèe ce lapni, ker ce reè bkoèr njobeè' weèe ku ce gani buu gani ke' ce koni ka'. Weèe túr buu ce weèe ce koèñ aè rtúr ka' njobeè' weèe ce loo vi ese Nyúè ka'.	You lust, and don't have. You kill, covet, and can't obtain. You fight and make war. You don't have, because you don't ask.
Beèe Farïìsi a m yu' ená ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès ker ba beèe ce Jisoès aè m baèptir naè a m ba goèr a caa ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân.	Therefore when the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and baptizing more disciples than John
Geewa'a, beèe magoèr a m byemi neè ye, ka' beèe mo' ce a m ba beâe bgoèrgoèr. Woweèe a m suñ beèe ka', njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp beèe Farïìsïî. Woweèe a m geèe wa'a, faè dïì' a bo juèu woweèe embe ndaèp rloo ka'.	Nevertheless even of the rulers many believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they didn't confess it, so that they wouldn't be put out of the synagogue,
E kɛ̀ʼ bkòr.	He has begun a fight.
Saimún Pitaè ba Tomas ce a m ce too ená rfar naè, ba Naètanïìyáèl ce aè rla' Kánaè ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, ba boo Sábáèdïî, ba beèe mo' a baa efa múè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a m ba aèbee.	Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus, Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two others of his disciples were together.
E làa waʼ àntaŋ.	He has said it reasonably.
Ler rbì rli ku tɛɛ àgee ndap.	Our kola nut tree is just standing near the house.
Doktà à cwaʼ ye nè nsàràʼ.	The doctor has injected him.
Jisoès aè laa neè ce fik anaè enáê, “AÈ be keèr yú mbaèñ tá ñwáè bo ye ka'.” Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a yu' aèmboè e laèa wa'a.	"Jesus told it, ""May no one ever eat fruit from you again!"" and his disciples heard it."
Wáè ce aè ce laèa ená beèe a fa koo bbyeèñge beèe mo' ka', waè' wáâ ke koo bbyeèñge beèe mo' a? Wáè ce aè baèa mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, waè' wáâ ke yáèá buu embe ndap mnyúè anaè a?	You who say a man shouldn't commit adultery. Do you commit adultery? You who abhor idols, do you rob temples?
Bɛʼni kòʼ anà tìtìyɛɛ fa nè mɛ̀.	Break that coco yam in the middle and give me.
Máè yu' aèmboè buu wááwá embe buèu ce Nyúè aè m geèe ba vïì enjep ñgoèñ wááwá, ba vïì embaè yir wááwá ba vïì enjep roè wááwá vi ce yoèp enáê, “Seèe yoñshi Nyúè ce e cu mbe kaèbaèraè', ker ba muu njeèe. Seèe yu'ni neè woweèe, ku'si woweèe, riñ ená woweèe a túr ñger wááwá. Seèe gee wa'a nfeseè.”	"I heard every created thing which is in heaven, on the earth, under the earth, on the sea, and everything in them, saying, ""To him who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb be the blessing, the honor, the glory, and the dominion, forever and ever! Amen!"""
Kaifaès ca a ñwáè ce e m cep Jus ená yi yu boèñboñ ená ñwáè moè'sir kwe aètu beèe naè.	Now it was Caiaphas who advised the Jews that it was expedient that one man should perish for the people.
Weèe aè ka' byemi, baná weèe be koni buu wááwá ce weèe aè ka' bipshi neè Nyúè aè rloo.”	"All things, whatever you ask in prayer, believing, you will receive."""
Ñwáè rkeè'ni shañ aè laa neè Pol enáê, “Ñgaâa teni mnsa' a tuu beèe ená a fúr weèe Silaès embe shañ. Baná weèe fúú laè embo, du boèñboñ.”	"The jailer reported these words to Paul, saying, ""The magistrates have sent to let you go; now therefore come out, and go in peace."""
Wáè ka' ba ñwáè Jisos Kraêis, baná aè yu moè' efa ñgúè Abraèham ce e be koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè ñgúè Abraèham naè.	If you are Christ's, then you are Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.
E ce cu a Saimúèn ñwáè yaati mñguâp nyaèa, ce yïì ndap yu aèwaâa rdip rgoèr naè.”	"He lodges with one Simon, a tanner, whose house is by the seaside."""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Máè m vúè njep ñgoèñ na tá m bo teni mnsa' tá beèe ce a ce yá buu ka' a bo yá buu, tá beèe ce a ce yá buu naè a bo kúti mnfeèp.”	"Jesus said, ""I came into this world for judgment, that those who don't see may see; and that those who see may become blind."""
Jisoès aè ka' naèti ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a caa njep ndeèe ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè ba Galeèleê.	It happened as he was on his way to Jerusalem, that he was passing along the borders of Samaria and Galilee.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Njeñwáè, m ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená nfeè' ce gháá ce beèe a be keèr duè rloo mbe rtuèu ca ka', ka' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	"Jesus said to her, ""Woman, believe me, the hour comes, when neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem, will you worship the Father."
A ka' baè', Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe wááwá be loè cañse maè' máè aèmboè Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa. Yi laèa enáê, ‘M be lïìp ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe tá njeèe yi da'se.’	"Jesus said to them, ""All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.'"
Weèe aè m tuu yeè beèe ená a du yá Joân. E m suñ weèe yuu mini.	You have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
Ñwáè ce e koèñ beèe e ke kur ntee, ker ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ. Ñwáè anaè e ke ba ñwáè ñko'ndoñ ka'. E ke yu' nyor káè naa tu ka'.	Love is patient and is kind; love doesn't envy. Love doesn't brag, is not proud,
Weèe rïìñ ntuu ce Nyúè aè m cep neè beâe aè to' Isráèl, a ce suñ beèe Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè cumúnyañ ce e ce loè ese ye njïì enjep Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè beèe wááwá.	The word which he sent to the children of Israel, preaching good news of peace by Jesus Christ--he is Lord of all--
a cu aè nsheè a ce keè'ni ye.	and they sat and watched him there.
Jisoès aè ka' táá njeptii govanoè, govanoè aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñkúú Jus a?” Jisoès aè laa enáê, “AÈ laèa wáè wa'a.”	"Now Jesus stood before the governor: and the governor asked him, saying, ""Are you the King of the Jews?"" Jesus said to him, ""So you say."""
“Wáè ce aè yu muu nyúèrkaè', a baa buu wááwá ce vi yu yáánïì, a ba ñwáè ye kïìñgaè, a ba ñwáè mbo'ni a misïî, aâ koèñ aè rborni efa rjepsi mini Tata ce e yu kuèyáá na ka' njoká?	"and said, ""Full of all deceit and all cunning, you son of the devil, you enemy of all righteousness, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord?"
Beèe mo' a ce kwaè'shi ená Tata e ke caèasi nfeè' efa rgeèe buu seê, a ce geèe yuu ce e m kaè' ka'. Yi yu ba ená Tata aè kur ntee neè weèe njobeè' e ce koèñ ená ñwáè moè' kwe bú aè cicïì ka'. E ce koèñ ená ñwáè wááwá kupse, borni yi ñgeâe bebep.	The Lord is not slow concerning his promise, as some count slowness; but is patient with us, not wishing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance.
Beèe mo' ce a m tááte aèfo, a ka' yu', a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce ká' AÈlajaè.”	"Some of them who stood there, when they heard it, said, ""This man is calling Elijah."""
AÈmboè yi yu wa' na baná Nyúè aè m fa seèe mncir njoká? E m fa seèe mncir tá seèe bo rïìñ yuu ce yi yu bebep. Mncir anaè vi m ba, duè baè' aè nfeè' ce ñwáè ce e m ba ñgúè Abraèham ca aè vúè. Ñwáè anaè a ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m ye leè' a Abraèham ená e be ghoèni ye. Nyúè aè lor mncir anaè, a fa neè bcïìndap Nyúè, bcïìndap Nyúè wo wo a fa mncir anaè neè ñwáè ce e m táá mbetar Nyúè ba ñwáè.	What then is the law? It was added because of transgressions, until the seed should come to whom the promise has been made. It was ordained through angels by the hand of a mediator.
Yu ba seèe ce seèe aè geèe búè ce mini, njobeè' seèe ce loo neè Nyúè aèmboè Yú' Rara yi ce roèo, a ce lu'shi aè rcu ce seèe Jisoès weèe ce cu, a ke' ce láè yiseèe ntee aè buu ce aè nyoèr ka'.	For we are the circumcision, who worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh;
Rmoèoshïì li ka' vú neè ñwáè, ñgaèñ fa laèa ená li loè ese Nyúè ka'. AÈde' yuu bebep yi mooshïì Nyúè ka', Nyúè ye ye e ke moèoshi ñwáè ka' foñ.	"Let no man say when he is tempted, ""I am tempted by God,"" for God can't be tempted by evil, and he himself tempts no one."
Baná buu anaè ce geèe ba máè ka', ce geèe ba buu bbebep ce vi yu njep máâ ntee.	So now it is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells in me.
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yu' wa'a, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger Básábuèl ce e yu ñkúú mnyúâmkaè'.”	"But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, ""This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons."""
Nsuñ aè m niñ mbaè btuè' ñgaâa cor ce a m ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, woweèe a tuu Baènabaès ená e du aè rla' Antïìyoèk.	The report concerning them came to the ears of the assembly which was in Jerusalem. They sent out Barnabas to go as far as Antioch,
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “M ce laèa neè wáè ená aè ku foosi ye ba ñkaèraè' saèamba caè'caè' ka'. Foèosi ye ñkaèraè' msaèambaê, bdïì' saèambaê.	"Jesus said to him, ""I don't tell you until seven times, but, until seventy times seven."
Yuu ce yi ke niñ njep ñwáè, yi ke geèe ñwáè e ba jaèpri aè bsii Nyúè ka'. Yuu ce yi ke geèe ñwáè e ba jaèpri aè bsii Nyúè yu ba yuu ce yi fúú enjep ye.	There is nothing from outside of the man, that going into him can defile him; but the things which proceed out of the man are those that defile the man.
Ku' beèe anaè a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná weèr be geèe wer ká?”	"The multitudes asked him, ""What then must we do?"""
Jisoès aè m ker du aèwaâa rdip rgoèr, ku' beèe a vúê, e yá'nïì woweèe.	He went out again by the seaside. All the multitude came to him, and he taught them.
A ye a kɛ̀ɛ.	He has disagreed with him.
Beèe mo' a ka' túr ñger aè rlaèa ená weèe ja' woweèe, rïìñ neè ená beèe ce weèe aè ba jaè' entombïì yu weèr. Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèr aè be laa ená weèe ja' weèr ka', weèr aè koèñ aè ryá ñgá' faè dïì' weèr bo jepsi beèe efa ryu' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisoès ka'.	If others partake of this right over you, don't we yet more? Nevertheless we did not use this right, but we bear all things, that we may cause no hindrance to the Good News of Christ.
M ce koèñ máná weèe riñ boèñboñ ená ñwáè aè ka' byemi ená a gee ye búè, baná ñgaèñ túr aè rláè mncir Jus wááwá foñ.	Yes, I testify again to every man who receives circumcision, that he is a debtor to do the whole law.
Yap ntee yi yinïì. Ká' ese aè nfeè' anaè vú ba' seè'ni na, yuu mo' yi ce cete wap bfee. E ke ba aè nfeè' ce a ce beè' ñwaè' mncir embe ñwaâ' rúèú neè woweèe, woweèe a ke' ce yu' yuu ce a ce beè' ka'. Bfee ñwáè vi ke múè'ti ba aè nfeè' ce ñwáè anaè ba Kraâis a yu aèbee.	But their minds were hardened, for until this very day at the reading of the old covenant the same veil remains, because in Christ it passes away.
Woweèe wááwá a bipshïì enáê, “Baná a wáè Muu Nyúè a?” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈ laèa weèe neè wee bcuèu ená a máè ye.”	"They all said, ""Are you then the Son of God?"" He said to them, ""You say it, because I am."""
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' anaè máè ba ba mbaè mmbo Yú' Nyúè. A ka' keè', a yá kaèbaèraè', ñwáè aè cu mbo.	Immediately I was in the Spirit. Behold, there was a throne set in heaven, and one sitting on the throne
Woweèe a du a yá beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba bleebeèe, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèr aè ye leè' tatap seê, ená weèr aè ka' tá yú Pol ka' weèr joo yuu kuè cuèu ka'.	"They came to the chief priests and the elders, and said, ""We have bound ourselves under a great curse, to taste nothing until we have killed Paul."
Weèe aè ka' ce geèe ba njáèá ñgeèe ca, ce kuè' njo baná buu ce weèe aè rïìñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis naè vi be bú aè cicïì ka'. Weèe be ye sá' efa gho.	For if these things are yours and abound, they make you to be not idle nor unfruitful to the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Jisos Kraâis aè m vúè aè rgeèe yuu ce Nyúè koèñ, seèe yu seè'ni brara aè bsii Nyúè. E m loèr yïì nyor a tañshi tañshïì aègho nfeè' mo'sir, yi ku mi wa'a.	by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
Nlaèa ca yu nlaâa mini, rtarnïì li ke' ba njo ka', aè ba nlaèa ce beèe a ba byemi neè yap ntee-ñwáè.	This saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè Taitoès, e yu ñwáè ce weèr ye ce faè' aèbee tá weèr bo jaè' weèe. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè bfúr mo' ce a woweèe a ce duè naè, woweèe a táá aètu bcor wááwá. Woweèe a be geèe tá beèe a nási Kraêis.	As for Titus, he is my partner and fellow worker for you. As for our brothers, they are the apostles of the assemblies, the glory of Christ.
E loo mbàa ese ye.	She has begged money from him.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ba laa ená aè lor lo rwaèa du aè ba laa nda anaè?”	"Then they asked him, ""Who is the man who said to you, 'Take up your mat, and walk'?"""
Zhìi tâ à m lò embe Ŋkàmbɛ̀ʼ, a ce cu àfa.	His father originated from Nkambe, and settled here.
E ka' yu' nsuñ aèmboè Jisoès, a tuu bleebeèe mo' efa múè Juês, ená a du laa neè Jisoès ená e vú gee tá yïì ñwáè rfaè' ke'se.	When he heard about Jesus, he sent to him elders of the Jews, asking him to come and save his servant.
E beesïì enáê, “A m tuu máè ená m vú yá ba njeèe embe ndúè' Isráèl ce yi m bú.”	"But he answered, ""I wasn't sent to anyone but the lost sheep of the house of Israel."""
Woweèe a be keè koèñ aè ryu' yuu ce yi yu mini ka', koèñ ba aè ryu' mghaèghar ce beèe a ce suñ aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ na.	and will turn away their ears from the truth, and turn aside to fables.
AÈsayaè ye ye aè m raasi seê, a sañ yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa enáê, “Beèe ce a m ce roèo máè ka', a yá máè. Máè duèñshi yaè nyor neè beèe ce a m ce bipshi ená m yu fá lá ka'.”	"Isaiah is very bold, and says, ""I was found by those who didn't seek me. I was revealed to those who didn't ask for me."""
Ñwáè wááwá yu'ni neè beèe ce a ce sa' to' njobeè' Nyúè a ñwáè ce e geèe ená beèe mo' a sa' beèe mo'. Nyúè ka' tá fa ñwáè ñger aè rsa' beèe ka', ñgaèñ túr ñger anaè ka'.	Let every soul be in subjection to the higher authorities, for there is no authority except from God, and those who exist are ordained by God.
Máè m nyoñsi weèe nyoñsi, a ke' fa weèe ba yuu ye ka' njobeè' weèe aè m be ghááte aè rye yuu ka'. Ka' seè'ni na, weèe aè be ghááte ka'.	I fed you with milk, not with meat; for you weren't yet ready. Indeed, not even now are you ready,
Buu wááwá ce weèe ce geèe, káè weèe ce laèa áè, geèe neè buu anaè wááwá ba aè rlii Tata Jisoès, ker ce yoñshi Nyúè Taèr a yeâ rlii.	Whatever you do, in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father, through him.
Beèe ce a be baè' mbe dïì' ce Nyúè e ke lúèshi anaè, lúèshi mbo foñ, yu ba seèe ce seèe aè yu' blaâa Nyúè a byemi. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a m yu' blaâa Nyúè a byemi ka' naè, Nyúè aè sañ mbe yeâ ñwaè' enáê, “Ntee yi m bep máè neè woweèe, máè ka' máná aède' woweèe a vú ba' mbe ya dïû' rlúèshïì tá a bo lúèshi ka'.” Yi yu ená dïû' rlúèshïì yi m buu ka', njobeè' e m ce laèa wa'a, e m banïì gee ñgoèñ wáá a lúshi yi yu.	"For we who have believed do enter into that rest, even as he has said, ""As I swore in my wrath, they will not enter into my rest;"" although the works were finished from the foundation of the world."
Zhìi mboo bòŋ sê.	His build-up is very nice.
Ñwáè moè' fa bo' yi tu ka'. Ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú ka' ce kwaè'shi ená e túr njáèá bfee ce ñgoèñ ca yi rïìñ ená a bfee, ñgaèñ aè ba kúti lúr tá e bo túr bfee neè mini-ñwáè.	Let no one deceive himself. If anyone thinks that he is wise among you in this world, let him become a fool, that he may become wise.
Ñgúè beèe ce a yu ñgaâa bsaèrbuu, a ba mini neè Nyúè ka' ce a ker ce roèo ená a duñshi woweèe ncoèo. M be duèñshi woweèe ncoèo moè' caa efa ncoèo yïì Jonaè ka'.” Jisoès aè ka' laa wa'a, a ma'shïì woweèe mbo a duê.	"An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and there will be no sign given to it, except the sign of the prophet Jonah."" He left them, and departed."
A be yúshi beèe mo' neè bkaèafaè', tá a koo beèe mo' aè rkoèñ, duè aègho aè bto' jáá jáèá jáá, tá beèe enje jáá a nyáñshi Jáèrusaláèm neè mkuèu caar tá yaèp nfeè' mi tá a ka' borni.	They will fall by the edge of the sword, and will be led captive into all the nations. Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
Weèr yu blúr njo' Jisos Kraêis. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe aè túr bfee njep Jisos Kraêis. Weèr túr ñger ka', weèe aè túr ye ñger. Weèe yu beèe ce beèe a ce yu'ni neè weèe, weèr aè ba yer beèe ce beèe a ce jaèasi.	We are fools for Christ's sake, but you are wise in Christ. We are weak, but you are strong. You have honor, but we have dishonor.
“Mboè Musïìs a ñwáè ce e m fa weèe mncir a? Geewa'a, ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú ce láè mncir anaè ka'. Weèe aè ka' ce roèo aè ryú máè njoká?”	"Didn't Moses give you the law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why do you seek to kill me?"""
Tu ca yi laa neè ye enáê, “Máè m laè' ku' mbaèa goèr seê, ka' ba ñwáè Ruêm.” Pol aè laa enáê, “A m bi yi máè aè ñwáè Ruêm.”	"The commanding officer answered, ""I bought my citizenship for a great price."" Paul said, ""But I was born a Roman."""
Yi m ba yáánïì ená a lor ba bláá gee buu ce vi táá ba aètu buu ce vi yu mbe buèu naè gee tá vi ba brara aè bsii Nyúè. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè buu embe buèu anaè, yi yu yáánïì ená a gee njáèá tañshïì mo' ce yi caèa btañshïì ce a m ce geèe neè mnyaèa naè, aètu buu anaè.	It was necessary therefore that the copies of the things in the heavens should be cleansed with these; but the heavenly things themselves with better sacrifices than these.
Woweèe a m laèa neè njeñwáè anaè enáê, “Weèr aè ku byemi ba njo' yuu ce wáè suñ weèr ka', weèr aè yu' seè'ni neè wer btuè', a riñ neè mini-ñwáè werná ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce e be geèe tá ñgoèñ yi luêñ.”	"They said to the woman, ""Now we believe, not because of your speaking; for we have heard for ourselves, and know that this is indeed the Christ, the Savior of the world."""
AÈde' seèe ka' ker laa seeká aèmboè seèe rïìñ buu ca na? Nyúè aè ka' ba aè mbeèp yïìseèe, ñwáè ce aède' e ker gee yuu mo' neè seèe ba nda?	What then shall we say about these things? If God is for us, who can be against us?
AÈ m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè moè', Jisoès aè du aè ryeñgeèr mbe ndaèp ñwáè Farïìsi moè' ce e m ba ñwáè rlii, beèe a ce ker ye boèñboñ seê.	It happened, when he went into the house of one of the rulers of the Pharisees on a Sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him.
Weèe aè ka' yu' ená a ce maè' bïìr, ker yu' aè mñoo ená a ce maè' bïìr aè bdïì' moè', mluè mi fa koo weèe ka'. Buu ca vi be kuè koni; geewa'a nfeè' ñgoèñ yi be mïì aè be gháá ka'.	"When you hear of wars and rumors of wars, don't be troubled. For those must happen, but the end is not yet.
Mark	Maêk	13	8	To' yi be maè' bïìr a to' mo', ñkúú moè' ma' bïìr a moè', tá ñgoèñ yi ci'ti aè bdïì' mo', tá njeè koo. Buu ca vi be ba neè beèe aèmboè aè nfeè' ce njeñwáè e ke káè' ce luuti muu naè.	For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom. There will be earthquakes in various places. There will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginning of birth pains.
Mark	Maêk	13	9	“Weèe lor nfeè', njobeè' a be loèr weèe duè aègho aè bkansuèr, lïìp weèe aè mndap mloo. A be tár weèe njeptii bgovanoè ba bkúú njo' máè, tá weèe suñ woweèe buu kuu máè.	But watch yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils. You will be beaten in synagogues. You will stand before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them.
Mark	Maêk	13	10	Bto' wááwá vi túr aè ryu' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ entombïì.	The Good News must first be preached to all the nations.
Mark	Maêk	13	11	A ka' koo weèe ce duè aègho tá a bo duè sa' weèe, mluè mi fa koo weèe ená weèe be duè laèa ba ká ka'. Nfeè' e gháá, weèe ku laa yuu ce yi vúè weèe kuè cuèu, njobeè' ce laèa weèe ka', ce laèa ba Yú' Rara neè weèe.	When they lead you away and deliver you up, don't be anxious beforehand, or premeditate what you will say, but say whatever will be given you in that hour. For it is not you who speak, but the Holy Spirit.
Mark	Maêk	13	12	Ñwáè be loèr nfúr yïì fa tá a yú, tá tar muu fa muu tá a yú. Boo a be teèe btu neè waêp bta ba waêp maê, geèe tá a yúshi woweèe.	Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death."
Beèe anaè a m ba aèmboè beèe ncoèp-baa aè-rrúèú wa'a.	They were about twelve men in all.
Jisoès aè m ce fúr yú' nyúèrkaè' ce yi m geèe ñwáè moè' e ce laèa ka'. Yú' nyúèrkaè' anaè yi ka' fúú, ñwáè anaè aè ká' a ce laèa, ku' beèe ce a m ba aèfo a bááñgeèr seê.	He was casting out a demon, and it was mute. It happened, when the demon had gone out, the mute man spoke; and the multitudes marveled.
Wáâ ñgwa, wáè rïìñ neè ká aèmboè aède' Nyúè lo ja' nduu woè njo' wáè? Wáâ nduu, wáè rïìñ neè ká aèmboè aède' Nyúè lo ja' ñgwa woè njo' wáè?	For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?
È bèesi njaŋ ce mɛ̀ ba taŋshi.	He has altered the xylophone that I arranged.
A mbe dïì' ce Jisos Kraâis yu, a ce sa' buu wááwá ce vi túr ñger mbe buèu; e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr a caa byú' wááwá, ba bcïìndap Nyúè wááwá, a ker túr ñger a caa beèe wááwá ce a túr mlii njep ñgoèñ na seè'ni. E túr ñger seè'ni na, keèr loè túr aè nfeè' ce e bii ka' ba.	far above all rule, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this age, but also in that which is to come.
tá m ke geèe tá aè tár mkuèu mbenduè beèe ce a baèa wáè.” ’	"until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.""'"
Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “Seèe fa koo ye ba aè múè ñkaè' ka', faè dïì' beèe a lo lapni, reè bkoèr ka'.”	"But they said, ""Not during the feast, lest a riot occur among the people."""
Laèa neè bkwaèa ená woweèe a yu'ni neè waêp mmasaè, gee buu wááwá ce wap mmasaè a koèñ ená woweèe a geêe. Woweèe a fa sár mnsár ka'.	Exhort servants to be in subjection to their own masters, and to be well-pleasing in all things; not contradicting;
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba mbe ndaèp rloo anaè ce yú' nyúèrkaè' yi m ba njep ye. Ñwáè anaè aè m waa tatap seê, a laa enáê,	In the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean demon, and he cried out with a loud voice,
Woweèe a m ku bii keè' mbe buèu a ce fyá' aèmboè e ce duè, a ka' loè a ku yá mmbañruè a baa aèmboè a táá a waâp geñ, a yar bcáâ' bbúú.	While they were looking steadfastly into the sky as he went, behold, two men stood by them in white clothing,
“M ce suñ weèe buu ca a ku bii fa weâe mú.	I have said these things to you, while still living with you.
E ka' ye byee mïìsi, yi ñger yi kútïì njo. E m cu aè rla' Daèmaskoès a beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès naè aè mú mnoèñ mo'.	He took food and was strengthened. Saul stayed several days with the disciples who were at Damascus.
Kuushi ená Jisos Kraâis ce e m ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Dávïìd aè m fúú efa rkwe. Ca yu Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce m ce feè'shi neè beèe.	Remember Jesus Christ, risen from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my Good News,
A máè byee vïû bteèe ce vi suèu embe buèu, ce vi ke fa beèe ryoèñ. Ñwáè aè ka' ye byee ca baná ñgaèñ be cu nfeseè. Byee ce m be fa neè beèe enjep ñgoèñ tá a bo koni ryoèñ na, yu yaè nyor.”	"I am the living bread which came down out of heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever. Yes, the bread which I will give for the life of the world is my flesh."""
waʼa [wáʔá] adv.	so; like this; like that.
Beèe ce a yu beèe Jisos Kraâis a maè' buu ce nyor ce koèñ. Cena yi yu aèmboè a taa lá vi mbe kïìntaa wa'a.	Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and lusts.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Jisos Kraâis aè m be vú ka' naè, mncir vi kur seèe aèmboè ñgaâa shañ wa'a caar a du a ba' aè nfeè' ce e m vúè, seèe aè byemïì neè ye naè.	But before faith came, we were kept in custody under the law, confined for the faith which should afterwards be revealed.
Rbyemïì li m geèe beèe mo' efa woweèe a ma' bïìr a bto' mo', a so bto' anaè. Woweèe a m sa' beèe aè njïû yáánïì, a koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè woweèe. Nyúè aè m cete bcuèu bbúrúè' njo' lap rbyemïì.	who, through faith subdued kingdoms, worked out righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions,
AÈpoloès yu nda, Pol aè ba nda? Weèr ku ba ba ñgaâa mfaè' neè Tata Nyúè. Nyúè aè m tuu weèr ená weèr gee tá weèe byemi neè Jisos kraêis. Ñwáè wááwá aè m ku gee ba li rfaè' ce Tata aè m fa neè ye ená e geêe.	Who then is Apollos, and who is Paul, but servants through whom you believed; and each as the Lord gave to him?
AÈde' túè' ker sii ka'. Mbuèu moè' be ba ená blam vi ba aèfo tá vi bo ce raa, káè ená nyúè sañ aèfo ka', njobeè' Taèr Nyúè be ba rraa neè woweèe. Woweèe a be sa' aèmboè bkúú nfeseè.	There will be no night, and they need no lamp light; for the Lord God will illuminate them. They will reign forever and ever.
Weèr bfúr wááwá ce a yu aèfa aè caè'ni bcor ce vi yu aè ñgoâñ Gaèláshaè.	and all the brothers who are with me, to the assemblies of Galatia:
A m laa byee a tar ye aègho. Maataè aè m ce caèasi byee. Lasoèroès ye ye aè m ba moè' ce a Jisoès weèe a m ce ye byee mbe tábuèr.	So they made him a supper there. Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with him.
E ke ba aè nfeè' ce njeñwáè ce luuti, e ce koosimnse njobeè' nfeè' rbi aè gháá. E ba aè nfeè' ce e bi muu wáá, e ker kuushi ryañ caè ka' njobeè' e ce lu'shi ená e bi muu.	A woman, when she gives birth, has sorrow, because her time has come. But when she has delivered the child, she doesn't remember the anguish any more, for the joy that a human being is born into the world.
Yú' Nyúè yi ka' ce keè'ni wáè, baná mncir vi ker túr ñger mbe wáâ nduè ka'.	But if you are led by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
A ba teni mnsaʼ cà ntìni.	Judgement was passed on that case today.
Woweèe a gee wa'a, beèe wááwá a cuteè aè nsheè.	They did so, and made them all sit down.
Baná ñwáè koñ Nyúè neè yi ntee wááwá, ba neè vi bfee-ñwáè, ker ba neè yi ñger wááwá, koñ nfúr yïì foñ aèmboè e koèñ yïì nyor. Yi boèñ magoèr aè rláè mncir a caa aè rgeèe btañshïì ce btoèo, ker ba btañshïì wááwá.”	"and to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more important than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices."""
a du aègho a yá Anaès entombïì. Anaès aè m ba talu yïì Kaifaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè feè' anaè.	and led him to Annas first, for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
Yuu tatap ce máè m suñ weèe aè m ba yuu ce a m suñ máè foñ. Nsuñ anaè yu ená Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe njo' yïìseèe buu bbebep aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená yi be ba naè.	For I delivered to you first of all that which I also received: that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures,
Woweèe wááwá a m ba cuâu mo'sir, a ce loo aèbee. Bbyeèñge mo' ba Máèári ma yïì Jisoès, ker ba bfúr Jisoès, a m ba a woweèe.	All these with one accord continued steadfastly in prayer and supplication, along with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
Jisoès yu yi ba ñwáè ce e cu nteèe nfeseè, aède' e ke buu efa rba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	But he, because he lives forever, has his priesthood unchangeable.
Mi mmbee mi kùʼŋger sê.	Her breasts are very big.
Ñwáè ce e tuu máè yu weèr ye, e maè'shi máè mamñgi' ka' njobeè' máâ ke kuâ geèe ba buu ce nyor ce boèñ ye.”	"He who sent me is with me. The Father hasn't left me alone, for I always do the things that are pleasing to him."""
Fa mɛ̀ mdip mtoʼ.	Give me cold water.
Mor zhi cɛ̂ɛ.	The fire has reduced into ambers.
Loèr neè nfeè' weèe beèe ce a yu aèmboè ñgwe. Loèr neè nfeè' weèe beâe bbebep ca weèe. Weèe lor nfeè' weèe woweèe ce a ce yá'ni ená ñwáè wááwá túr aè rgeèe búè ka' ba ñwáè Nyúè naè.	Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workers, beware of the false circumcision.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye ená, “Maè'shi tá bgúâú beèe a tuñ wap bgúâú beèe. Duè yo du fe'shi kúú Nyúè neè beèe.”	"But Jesus said to him, ""Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but you go and announce the Kingdom of God."""
Ku' mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge a m ce byemi neè Tataê.	More believers were added to the Lord, multitudes of both men and women.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m rïìñ mbuèu efa buu ce vi m koni na efa rkáè' ka'. Woweèe a m loè a riñ ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m kuè'si Jisoès naè. Woweèe a m kuushi buu ce a m sañ a kuu ye aè nfeè' anaè, a kuushi foñ aèmboè a m geèe buu ca neè ye.	His disciples didn't understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written about him, and that they had done these things to him.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu naè aè laa ená a lor Pol niñ aègho mbe barakïì, lip ye, bipshi buu neè ye tá a bo rïìñ mbuèu ce Jus a m ce ghaa ye aè njáâá wa'a.	the commanding officer commanded him to be brought into the barracks, ordering him to be examined by scourging, that he might know for what crime they shouted against him like that.
E m ker ñwañshi bláá anaè aè dïû' rara caè, a ker ñwañshi aè buu mfaè' wááwá ce vi m ba mbo.	Moreover he sprinkled the tabernacle and all the vessels of the ministry in the same way with the blood.
A ke laa mki ba ne marki.	Marki is used for making country salt.
Njeèe anaè aè du a koo ñwaè' ca embaè bo maè' ñwáè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè' naè.	Then he came, and he took it out of the right hand of him who sat on the throne.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a ka' yá buu bbáèá ce e m geèe na, keèr yu' aèmboè bghaèrbeèe a ce yoèp mbe Ndaèp Nyúè enáê, “Seèe ku'si Muu Dávïìd”, ntee yi yañ woweèe seê.	"But when the chief priests and the scribes saw the wonderful things that he did, and the children who were crying in the temple and saying, ""Hosanna to the son of David!"" they were indignant,"
Seemoè' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú be laèa neè máè enáê, “Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè ka' ce taèa ñwáè njoká, aèmboè yi yu ba ená aède' ñwáè kanïì efa rgeèe yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ ená ñgaèñ gee ka' na?”	"You will say then to me, ""Why does he still find fault? For who withstands his will?"""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mbaèa ce weèe ce kuèu tá weèe bo jaè' beèe Nyúè ce aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aègho naè, weèe ku kuu ba aè njáèá njïì ce máè m laèa neè bcor aè ñgoâñ Gaèláshaè ená a kuu naè.	Now concerning the collection for the saints, as I commanded the assemblies of Galatia, you do likewise.
AÈ ke' ku ba cena caè' ka', máè loèr buu wááwá aè buu ce vi ce búsi máè búsi, a ma' vi wááwá tá m bo yi yaè Tata Jisos Kraêis, njobeè' yïì anaè a yuu ce yi yu goèr a caa buu wááwá. Máè búsi buu wááwá njo' ye. Máè loèr vi seè'ni aè buu bcicïì tá m bo ba aèbee weèr Kraêis,	Yes most certainly, and I count all things to be loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord, for whom I suffered the loss of all things, and count them nothing but refuse, that I may gain Christ
Túè mo' yi m ba aè rla' anaè aègee cuâu ñka' mo' ce a m ce too ená cuèu ñka' njeèe. A too rlii túè anaè aè li Hibruè ená Báètsataè. A m baè'ri btaèp mbuèu too aèwaâa túè anaè vi taê.	"Now in Jerusalem by the sheep gate, there is a pool, which is called in Hebrew, ""Bethesda,"" having five porches."
Jisoès aè ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cumúnyañ ba neè weèe. AÈmboè yaè Ta aè m tuu máè naè, má máè ce tuu weèe foñ.”	"Jesus therefore said to them again, ""Peace be to you. As the Father has sent me, even so I send you."""
Yuu ce yi geèe seèe, seèe aè riñ aèmboè rkoèñnïì li yu, yu ená Kraâis aè m fa yi tu, a kwe njo' seèe. See seèe túr aè rfa viseèe btu njobeè' bfúr viseèe.	By this we know love, because he laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
Yoèñshi Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, aè rlii yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis. Yoèñshi ye aè buu wááwá aè nfeè' wááwá.	giving thanks always concerning all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, to God, even the Father;
Ñgaâa ncïìñ nto', ba beèe wááwá ce aèfa a riñ seè'ni ená m yu mbe shañ njobeè' m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis.	so that it became evident to the whole palace guard, and to all the rest, that my bonds are in Christ;
Wèr Tata à mʉ taŋ mbʉ njoʼ zhii zhi ku ba sii àmbò yaa.	Tata and I were disputing over goats because his are black like mine.
Yi ku ba ba wa' caè'caè' ka'. Boo Ráèbákaè a m túr taèr moè'sir ce e yu yïìseèe ta Aisïìk.	Not only so, but Rebecca also conceived by one, by our father Isaac.
Muu nsuènsuè ca aè laa neè ye enáê, “Máè láè mncir ca wááwá, baná yuu ce aède' m ker gee yu ba ká?”	"The young man said to him, ""All these things I have observed from my youth. What do I still lack?"""
Kuushi neè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m cep aè rlii Tataê, bfúr waê. Yá'ni neè ese woweèe aè rtúr ntee tatap aè nfeè' ñgá' aèmboè woweèe a m túr naè.	Take, brothers, for an example of suffering and of patience, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
À bii ghàrŋwɛ̀, a wɛ̀ yàa ghàr kaʼ.	You are still a child, you are not my age mate.
Ŋgʉp à gaa embe ndùu mmbùu njobèʼ mbèŋ à gwè mboo.	The fowl was scared from the eggs because rain fell on that spot.
Bkar waê, viseèe mntee vi ka' tá sa' seèe ka', seèe wáp aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	Beloved, if our hearts don't condemn us, we have boldness toward God;
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir moè' aè vúê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, wáè ka' ce duè ba fá, baná m be kuè ba fa wáâ mbuèu.”	"A scribe came, and said to him, ""Teacher, I will follow you wherever you go."""
Ñkaraè, buu ce aè ce geèe neè bfúr na, aè ce geèe neè mini-ñwáè, lañlañ neè bkeèe.	Beloved, you do a faithful work in whatever you accomplish for those who are brothers and strangers.
Cena yi ka' mïì wáá, Josáèf ce aè rla' AÈrimaètiyaè aè vú a yá Pailáèt. E m ba ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès a ke' ce koèñ ená beèe a riñ ka' njobeè' e m ce wáp Juês. E m laèa neè Pailáèt ená e fa ye njïì tá e suusi gúâú Jisoès embe kïìntaa, tuñ. Pailáèt aè ka' byemi, e du a suusïî, a du aègho.	After these things, Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly for fear of the Jews, asked of Pilate that he might take away Jesus' body. Pilate gave him permission. He came therefore and took away his body.
M ce sañ neè weèe ba aè njáèá ená weèe máñni mini ka'. M ce sañ njobeè' weèe yi mini wáá, a ker yi ená aètaè mnde' mi lo ese mini ka'.	I have not written to you because you don't know the truth, but because you know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
Ñkwaèa ca yi m bi muu yïì ca aèmboè a ke bi boo wááwá naè. Njeñwáè ce e m ba ñkwaèa ka' naè aè m bi muu yïì ba njo' mkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m geèe neè Abraèhaêm.	However, the son by the handmaid was born according to the flesh, but the son by the free woman was born through promise.
Pailáèt aè boñlaèr a teni mnsa' ená a taa ye mbe kïìntaa aèmboè woweèe a laèa naè.	Pilate decreed that what they asked for should be done.
Ñwáè ce e be kep buu efa mñkúè ce yá sá' efa li rfaè' wáá. E ce baashi byee ce vi bo koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè, tá ñwáè rbyeè ker ba ñwáè rkep a bo lu'shi bsïìp.	He who reaps receives wages, and gathers fruit to eternal life; that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
Yu'ni neè neè woweèe boèñboñ seê, koñ woweèe neè ye ntee-ñwáè njo' rfaè' ce woweèe a ce geèe. Cu neè rcu ce li yu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	and to respect and honor them in love for their work's sake. Be at peace among yourselves.
E beesïì enáê, “Duè neè du yá ñwáè moè' aè múè rla', laa neè ye enáê, ‘ñwáè ryá'nïì aè laèa enáê, “Yaè nfeè' aè gháá. M be ye ñkaâ' caèasi mndap weèr ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu mbe wáâ ndaèp.” ’ ”	"He said, ""Go into the city to a certain person, and tell him, 'The Teacher says, ""My time is at hand. I will keep the Passover at your house with my disciples.""'"""
Ŋgǎa ŋgwaʼ a ce cuute ntìni.	Members of the society are having a session today.
Sol aè m ku ba aèbee a woweèe, a ce jáèr a woweèe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	He was with them entering into Jerusalem,
Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, Nyúè gee wee mntee vi tap. E keè ba aè nfeè' ce Tata Jisoès aè vúè a yïì beèe weèe naè, tá weèe bo ba brara, keè' túr faèa aè bsii Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta ka'.	to the end he may establish your hearts blameless in holiness before our God and Father, at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints.
Weèr aè m suñ weèe wáá aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ba naè ená ñgá' be koni. Weèe aè riñ foñ ená ñgá' anaè aè koni weèe wáá.	For most certainly, when we were with you, we told you beforehand that we are to suffer affliction, even as it happened, and you know.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Moè' efa weèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ce e ce cúè' bráâd weèr ye njep kañ na, be fyeèni máè.	"He answered them, ""It is one of the twelve, he who dips with me in the dish."
Ntaandʉŋ wèe a dù à mŋkʉ̀ʉ.	Ntaandung and her friends have gone to the farm.
a vú aègho njep kañ a fa neè muu anaè, e du aègho, a fa neè yïì maê.	His head was brought on a platter, and given to the young lady: and she brought it to her mother.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Máèári.” E karsïì nyor a laa neè ye aè li Hibruè enáê, “Raèbonïì”, ce mbuèu efa gho yu enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì”.	"Jesus said to her, ""Mary."" She turned and said to him, ""Rabboni!"" which is to say, ""Teacher!"""
Mbaŋrùŋwɛ̀ ca cɛp àmbùu bbyèŋge sê.	This man is fond of chasing women.
Tá Nyúè ka' keè geèe ñgoèñ, e m ce seèe ená seèe ba aèbee seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe tá seèe bo ba yïì beèe, ba brara, ba yáánïì a yeâ bsii. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Nyúè aè koèñ seèe,	even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we would be holy and without blemish before him in love;
Pol aè laa neè tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe ba bsoogáè enáê, “Beèe ca a ka' tá kuè cu mbe keñ na ka', weèe luñ ka'.”	"Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, ""Unless these stay in the ship, you can't be saved."""
E beesïì enáê, “Yaè ma ba bfúr wa yu beèe ce a ce yu' blaâa Nyúè, a ce geèe buu ce Nyúè ce laèa.”	"But he answered them, ""My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God, and do it."""
E ba ñwáè ce e be táá njep ryá'nïì mini ce a yá'ni ye, tá ye ye foñ bo rïìñ aè ryá'ni beèe mo' boèñboñ, keèr gee tá yi yááti rara ená beèe ce a ce kani ryá'nïì ca naè a ce jep jep.	holding to the faithful word which is according to the teaching, that he may be able to exhort in the sound doctrine, and to convict those who contradict him.
“Ñwáè aè ka' somir wáè, weèe ye ce duè mbe koêr, aè yá ená weèe ye aè seèesi a ba cuâu mo'sir, faè dïì' e du neè wáè, fa wáè neè ñwáè nsa' mnsa' tá ñwáè nsa' mnsa' fa wáè neè ñwáè ncir tá ñwáè ncir fa wáè mbe shañ ka'.	Agree with your adversary quickly, while you are with him in the way; lest perhaps the prosecutor deliver you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and you be cast into prison.
Wɛ̀ lìp ye njokɛ?	Why have you beaten her?
Jisoès a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a m ker kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. E ka' ce jáèshi mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaèa ryá'ni mncir ker ba bleebeèe a vú a yá ye,	They came again to Jerusalem, and as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, and the scribes, and the elders came to him,
Seèe rïìñ ená e m ba yi ba raèraâ Judaè. Musïìs aè m laèa yuu mo' a kuu raèraè ca aè nfeè' ce e m ce laèa aèmboè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ka'.	For it is evident that our Lord has sprung out of Judah, about which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.
Kraâis ye ye aè m geèe ba yuu ce nyor boñ ba ye ka'. Yi ku ba ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Mcáp ce beèe a m cáp wáè aègho naè, mi duè ba mbe máâ tuè.”	"For even Christ didn't please himself. But, as it is written, ""The reproaches of those who reproached you fell on me."""
Máè yá ya máná seèe fa geèe tá buu ba btatap neè beèe enje jáá ce a ce kupse ce byemi neè Nyúè naè ka'.	"Therefore my judgment is that we don't trouble those from among the Gentiles who turn to God,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	15	20	Seèe aè ba sañ ba ñwaè' neè woweèe, suñ woweèe ená woweèe a fa ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ka', borni bsaèkïì, ker borni efa rye mnyaèa ce a toosi mndoñ efa gho, vi kweñgeèr, ker borni efa rno bláá.	but that we write to them that they abstain from the pollution of idols, from sexual immorality, from what is strangled, and from blood.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	15	21	To a feè'shi buu embe mncir Musïìs aè mla' wááwá aè bfeè' aèñgoo, a ce beè' buu anaè aè mndap mloo aè mmbomntaa wááwá.”	For Moses from generations of old has in every city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues every Sabbath."
Máè koèñ ená wee mntee vi ba btatap tá weèe koñ bfúr wee, ba aèbee weèe woweèe. M ce koèñ máná yuu ce yi m ba aè bsúèti, Nyúè aè gee seèe aè riñ naè, yi ba rara neè weèe tá weèe bo rïìñ yi boèñboñ. Yuu ce yi m ba aè bsúèti anaè yu nsuñ aèmboè Jisos Kraêis.	that their hearts may be comforted, they being knit together in love, and gaining all riches of the full assurance of understanding, that they may know the mystery of God, both of the Father and of Christ,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná seèe be keèr ba aèmboè bghaèrbeèe ka'. Beèe a ka' ce bo' seèe neè ryá'nïì mnde', seèe bo daè' ka'. Woweèe a ka' lor ba bfee kwáèá ce taè' tuè'si seèe aègho, seèe bo cïì'ti aèmboè yuu ce yi ke cïì'ti aè nfeè' fu' yi ce caèa naè ka'.	that we may no longer be children, tossed back and forth and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the trickery of men, in craftiness, after the wiles of error;
Geèe tá woweèe a faêp, faè dïì' woweèe a bo keèr yá buu ka'. Gúú wap mnjïì nfeseè.”	"Let their eyes be darkened, that they may not see. Bow down their back always."""
E m laèa yuu mo' aè múè beèe ce aède' woweèe a m ba koo ye aètu mo ka'. Woweèe a m báèáñger aè njáèá njïì ce e m beèesi yuu ce woweèe a m bipshi, a baate yap cuèu.	They weren't able to trap him in his words before the people. They marveled at his answer, and were silent.
E m ker laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Saimúèn, muu Joân, aè koèñ máè a?” E laa neè ye enáê, “ÁÈno Tataê, aè rïìñ wáná m koèñ wáè.” E laa neè ye enáê, “Nyañ ya njeèe.”	"He said to him again a second time, ""Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me?"" He said to him, ""Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you."" He said to him, ""Tend my sheep."""
Woweèe a ka' fyeèni, nduu yïì a gapnïì mbaèa efa gho, a lor bár a du aègho a lá njeptii ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès. Ñgwa yïì aè m rïìñ enjo foñ.	and kept back part of the price, his wife also being aware of it, and brought a certain part, and laid it at the apostles' feet.
Koʼsi mbe kì.	Lift it up.
Bsaèrbuu vi yu aègho wáá, a ka' ba ba aè bsúèti. Ñwáè ce e geèe bsaèrbuu anaè vi ke' ce yááti aèwañ ka' yu aègho. Be ba aè nfeè' ce a fúr ñwáè anaè,	For the mystery of lawlessness already works. Only there is one who restrains now, until he is taken out of the way.
Njobeè' Muu Ñwáè ye ye aè m vúè ená beèe a bo ce faè' neè ye ka', e m vúè tá e bo faè', keèr fa li ryoèñ, tee beèe magoèr efa rkwe.”	"For the Son of Man also came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."""
Yi yu ená Muu Ñwáè aè m vúè aè rroèo beèe ce a m bú, tá e bo geèe tá woweèe a luêñ.”	"For the Son of Man came to seek and to save that which was lost."""
Máè m ce faè' neè weèe, bcor mo' efaè jáá vi ce laè' máè. Baná máè m ce yáèá ese bcor anaè tá m bo jaè' weèe.	I robbed other assemblies, taking wages from them that I might serve you.
M ka' ce geèe ba mfaè' yaè Taê, weèe aè ka' tá baè byemi neè máè njo' buu ce m ce laèa ka', weèe aè ba byemi neè máè njo' buu ce m ce geèe tá weèe bo rïìñ rara ená m yu ñgúè' moè' efa yaè Taê, yaè Ta aè ba ñgúè' moè' efa máè.”	"But if I do them, though you don't believe me, believe the works; that you may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in the Father."""
Wɛ̀ yɛ nè loo rlir a?	Did you see it yourself?
Fa maè' bfee rfaè' ce Nyúè aè fa neè wáè ka'. Nyúè aè m fa wáè bfee ca njo' buu ce e m geèe aè nfeè' moè', beèe mo' a yu' ese ye a laa aèmboè wáè, btu embe cor foñ a la' mmbo mbe wáâ nduè naè.	Don't neglect the gift that is in you, which was given to you by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the elders.
Byú' bbebep ce vi m niñ njep beèe magoèr, vi m ce waani, ce fúúse enjep beèe anaè. Beèe magoèr ce yaèp ñgúè' nyor moè' aè m kwe, ker ba beèe ce a m ba mntáèñ a m luèñ.	For unclean spirits came out of many of those who had them. They came out, crying with a loud voice. Many who had been paralyzed and lame were healed.
Baa zhi yu wɛ̀ɛ.	The fufu is soft.
Ntee yi ka' bep wáè, aè fa maè'shi yi gee tá aè gee yuu bebep ka'. Fa cu neè ntee bebep ca caar nyúè coo ka'.	Be angry, and don't sin. Don't let the sun go down on your wrath,
E lor yi ñkuèñ a súñ ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa mkaèñsïì embe buèu, a ma' njep nsheè. Nyaèa anaè aè vú a táá kuèntombïì neè njeñwáè ce e m ce luuti muu naè ená njeñwáè anaè e bi muu tá e bo ye.	His tail drew one third of the stars of the sky, and threw them to the earth. The dragon stood before the woman who was about to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
Beèe Farïìsi mo' a vúê, a mooshi ye, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Waè' ncir yi byemi ená ñwáè juu ñgwa yïì a?”	"Pharisees came to him testing him, and asked him, ""Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife?"""
Jisoès aè ka' ce fúú embe keñ, a yá ñwáè moâ' aè rla' anaè ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m ba njep ye. E m kar mbuèuriñ káâ' aè nfeè' njïìsaèp seê, a ce cu mbe ndaèp ka'. E m ce cu yi ba faèdïì' ce a m ce tuñ beèe.	When Jesus stepped ashore, a certain man out of the city who had demons for a long time met him. He wore no clothes, and didn't live in a house, but in the tombs.
Yïìseèe Nyúè yu aèmboè mor ce yi be toèo buu wááwá naè wa'a.	for our God is a consuming fire.
Woweèe a m túr yuu laèa ka'.	They couldn't answer him regarding these things.
Ñwáè ce e koèñ nfúr yïì, ñgaèñ cu aè rraa, yuu mo' yi yu njep ye ce aètaè yi gee ñgaèñ gee yuu bebep ka'.	He who loves his brother remains in the light, and there is no occasion for stumbling in him.
Mnoèñ mo' vi ka' caèa, ñkúú Agripaè ba Báènis a du aè rla' Sisaèriyaè aè rcaè'ni Fástoès.	Now when some days had passed, King Agrippa and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, and greeted Festus.
Woweèe wááwá a ye a yu', ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a baashïì bbábá' ce vi m báti, vi ruu aè mñkaèa ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	They ate, and were all filled. They gathered up twelve baskets of broken pieces that were left over.
Mɛ̀ kapshi mgbaŋ njep teteʼ.	I kept salt in a calabash salt container.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Poêl, ce Nyúè aè ce máè ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. Weèr Soèstánïì ce e yu nfúr yïìseèe ce caè'ni weèe.	Paul, called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and our brother Sosthenes,
Woweèe a m caèa njïû aè ñgoâñ Misïìyaè a du a ba' aè rla' Trowaès.	Passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
Tar muu aè kuushïì ená nfeè' muu yïì aè mú naa rlir anaè ku ba nfeè' ce Jisoès aè mú laa neè ye ená muu yïì be kwe ka' naè. Ye yi tu nyor ker ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp wááwá a byemïì neè Jisoès.	"So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, ""Your son lives."" He believed, as did his whole house."
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “M túr mbaèa ka', geewa'a, m be fa wáè yuu ce m túr. AÈ rlii Jisos Kraâis ce aè rlaè' Nasaráèt, naèti mbekïì, jáêr.”	"But Peter said, ""Silver and gold have I none, but what I have, that I give you. In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, get up and walk!"""
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', e du a waâp mbuèu, a ce jáèr mbenduè rdip.	In the fourth watch of the night, Jesus came to them, walking on the sea.
Nduu ñwáè fa kani bkuu ñgwa, káè ñgwa kani bkuu nduu ka'. A ye a ka' tá tarshi bkuu ka' baná a ye a ba byemi aèbee ená a be geèe wa' ka', tá a bo loèr nfeè' anaè geèe ba rloo. Wee loè ker tarshi bkuu faè dïì' Sataèn mooshi weèe tá weèe gwe rmoèoshïì njobeè' weèe aè moèo aè rcu wa' laèr ka'.	Don't deprive one another, unless it is by consent for a season, that you may give yourselves to fasting and prayer, and may be together again, that Satan doesn't tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi njep ma rdip ce a too ená Yufrátïìs. E ka' cuè', rdip anaè li yuushïì tá bkúú ekuè mbuèuntii a bo caèa njïì enjo.	The sixth poured out his bowl on the great river, the Euphrates. Its water was dried up, that the way might be prepared for the kings that come from the sunrise.
“Weèe ce kwaè'shi wee ká aèmboè Kraâis anaè? E yu muu nda?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “E yu muu Dávïìd.”	"saying, ""What do you think of the Christ? Whose son is he?"" They said to him, ""Of David."""
E bèesi cɛ̀ʼ a yar njìnjì.	He turned the cloth inside out.
caar ñkúú moè' ce e m rïìñ Josáèf ka', aè ko' kúú aè to' Ijïìp.	until there arose a different king, who didn't know Joseph.
Muu wàa nlee à lòr ŋgwa.	My eldest son has got married.
E mòoshi mɛ̀ nè mbàa enɛ m̀ be lòr lɛ, mɛ̀ lor kaʼ.	He tempted me with money whether I would take it; I did not take.
Láè ntee aè buu ca, ce gee vi tá ñwáè wááwá bo yá aèmboè aè ce kuè' aè buu Nyúè.	Be diligent in these things. Give yourself wholly to them, that your progress may be revealed to all.
A ka' baè', a cu aè rla' mo' ce a m too ená Nasaráèt. Yuu ce ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa enáê, “A be too ye ená ñwáâ aè rla' Nasaráèt” naè yi ghááteè njo.	"and came and lived in a city called Nazareth; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophets: ""He will be called a Nazarene."""
A m taa Jisòs mbe kìntaa ba bzhɛ̀ɛ bbâa.	Jesus was nailed on the cross alongside two thieves.
E ke dù ntaa nfèʼ sìp.	He goes to the market all the time.
Ñwáè ka' tá ba ce aède' e beesïì ka, baná beèe anaè a fa laèa mbe cor ka'. Woweèe a ku ce laa neè Nyúè ba enjep ntee.	But if there is no interpreter, let him keep silent in the assembly, and let him speak to himself, and to God.
“Foèo yi ba neè Nyúè embe buèu, tá cumúnyañ ba njep ñgoèñ neè beèe ce Nyúè ce yu' rboèñ neè woweèe.”	Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good will toward men.
Bfúr ce aèfa wááwá a caè'ni weèe. Caè'ni neè bfúr mo' ba mo', baa woweèe nje nyoèr neè rkoèñnïì-ñwáè.	All the brothers greet you. Greet one another with a holy kiss.
E ku ká' a ce yá buu, a nati a du a yeâ mbuèu, a ce yoèñshi Nyúè. Beèe wááwá a ka' yá, a yoñshi Nyúè foñ.	Immediately he received his sight, and followed him, glorifying God. All the people, when they saw it, praised God.
Joân aè m baèptir weèe neè mdip, geewa'a, ku báti mnoèñ múcaèr tá a baptir weèe ba neè Yú' Rara.”	"For John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit not many days from now."""
Woweèe a gee rtaa kúú neè bsoèpsïì a sop ye mbe tuè, a lor cáâ' beer a fa ye aè nyoèr.	The soldiers twisted thorns into a crown, and put it on his head, and dressed him in a purple garment.
Ca yu byee ce vi suèu embe buèu, aè ke' ba njáèá byee ce wee bta a m ye a ku lo a kweñger naè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ye byee ca baná ñgaèñ be cu nfeseè.”	"This is the bread which came down out of heaven--not as our fathers ate the manna, and died. He who eats this bread will live forever."""
Bkúú rrúú ca a be kuè túr ba rkwaè'shïû rmo'sir. Woweèe a be fa wap mnyor neè nyaèa anaè, ce faè' ba neè ye.	These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jus laa neè ñwáè ce Jisoès aè ba gee e luñ naè enáê, “Wáè rïìñ ená ntïìni a mmbomntaa. Wáè byáè' rwaèa anaè wa'a, a bú' ncir.”	"So the Jews said to him who was cured, ""It is the Sabbath. It is not lawful for you to carry the mat."""
Woweèe a m cu aèfo a ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisos weèe aè nfeè' njïìsaèp.	They stayed there with the disciples for a long time.
Nduñgúp aè ker toñ aè nfeè' anaè. Pitaè aè kuushïì yuu ce Jisoès aè m suñ ye enáê, “Tá nduñgúp ka' toñ nfeè' baa, aè be kani ená aè rïìñ máè ka', ñkaèraè' taar naè.” E ka' kuushi wa'a, a bú' rwar.	"The rooster crowed the second time. Peter remembered the word, how that Jesus said to him, ""Before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times."" When he thought about that, he wept."
Nyúè aè m boo ñwáè entombïì ba neè nshe, ñwáè embenjïì aè vú yi ba embe buèu.	The first man is of the earth, made of dust. The second man is the Lord from heaven.
E beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè ce e m byeè ñgúè buu bboèñboñ naè a Muu Ñwáè,	"He answered them, ""He who sows the good seed is the Son of Man,"
AÈmboè Jonaè aè m ba ncoèo neè beâe aè to' Nenávïì naè, Muu Ñwáè ye ye be ba ncoèo neè ñgúè beâe seè'ni na.	For even as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so will also the Son of Man be to this generation.
Bfúr waê, weèr ker túr yuu mo' aè rkyeèse mbenduè buu ce weèr aè suñ weèe wáá na. Weèr ce bu' mmbo neè weèe aè rlii Tata Jisoès ená weèe ce gee ba ñgeèe ce Nyúè aè koèñ, aèmboè weèe ce geèe naè, ke' borni aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Njáèá ñgeèe ca a yïì ce weèr aè m yá'ni weèe.	Finally then, brothers, we beg and exhort you in the Lord Jesus, that as you received from us how you ought to walk and to please God, that you abound more and more.
Judaè aè ba muu Jakoèp, Jakoèp aè ba muu Aisïìk, Aisïìk aè ba muu Abraèhaêm, Abraèham aè ba muu Táraè, Táraè aè ba muu Nahoèr,	the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
Bzhɛ̀ɛ bvi kaʼ koo wɛ,̀ à wâa.	If thieves attacked you, you should alarm.
Beèe magoèr a m byemi neè ye, a laa enáê, “Kraâis anaè aè ka' nyáá, aède' e duñshïì mncoèo caa vïì ce ñwáè ca aè duèñshi na a?”	"But of the multitude, many believed in him. They said, ""When the Christ comes, he won't do more signs than those which this man has done, will he?"""
Loo neè foñ ená Nyúè fúr weèr embaè mmbo ñgaâa bsaèrbuu. Weèr ce laèa wa' njobeè' beèe wááwá a ce byemi blaèa ca ka'.	and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and evil men; for not all have faith.
Seèe rïìñ seená seèe cu njep ye, e cu njep seèe, njobeè' yi yú' ce e fa neè seèe.	By this we know that we remain in him and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit.
Rla' wááwá li ci'tïì, beèe a cañseè a vúse a koo Poêl, a súñ a fúú aègho embe Ndaèp Nyúè, a cete ncúèúndúè',	All the city was moved, and the people ran together. They seized Paul and dragged him out of the temple. Immediately the doors were shut.
Caè'ni neè AÈpáláès ce e ku táá tatap, a duñshi neè mini-ñwáè ená e yu ñwáè Kraêis. Caè'ni neè beèe wááwá embe ndaèp AÈrïìstobuluès.	Greet Apelles, the approved in Christ. Greet those who are of the household of Aristobulus.
Weèe fa loèr weená weèe aè ka' ce laèa enáê, ‘Abraèham yu yeèr taê,’ weèe fúr wee btu efa ñgá' ka'. M ce suñ weèe ená aède' Nyúè ku lor bluèr ca beesi aè boo Abraèhaêm.	Don't think to yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father,' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yuu ce aède' yi fúr njáèá yú' ca enjep ñwáè ku ba rloo rtatap caè'caè'.”	"He said to them, ""This kind can come out by nothing, except by prayer and fasting."""
Nyúè a ñwáè ce e geèe bkúú ca a túr ntee e mo'sir, a vú aèbee, a fa yap ñger neè nyaèa ca ená e sa' caar tá yuu ce e m laèa ená yi be keè ba, yi geetïî.	For God has put in their hearts to do what he has in mind, and to be of one mind, and to give their kingdom to the beast, until the words of God should be accomplished.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, yi boèñ ená mbañruèñwáè túr ñgwa yïì, tá njeñwáè túr nduu yïì, faè dïì' woweèe a lo gweè rmoèoshïì, ce saèki ka'.	But, because of sexual immoralities, let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
Mɛ̀ riŋ à rkupshi shwàʼtu.	I know how to make a comb.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a ka' vúè mbe yeâ nduè, e natïì mbekïì a kúti aè múè rla'. Túè' aè ka' raa, a Baènabaès a natïì a du aè rla' Dábeè.	But as the disciples stood around him, he rose up, and entered into the city. On the next day he went out with Barnabas to Derbe.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du mbaè rdip Jodaèn tá Joân bo baèptir ye.	Then Jesus came from Galilee to the Jordan to John, to be baptized by him.
Weèe ce weèe yu beèe enje jáá naè, kuushi neè njáèá beèe ce weèe aè m ba. Jus ce a ce too wap btu ená ñgaâa ñgeèe búè naè, a ce too weèe ená mmbáè'nsúèr. Búè ca ku ba búè ce beèe a geèe neè mmbo.	"Therefore remember that once you, the Gentiles in the flesh, who are called ""uncircumcision"" by that which is called ""circumcision,"" (in the flesh, made by hands);"
Hároèd ca aè m ba ñwáè ce e m tuu beèe, a du a koo Joân, a kur, a fa ye mbe shañ aètu Háèrodïìyaè ce e m ba ñgwa nfúr yïì ce Feleêp.	For Herod himself had sent out and arrested John, and bound him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, for he had married her.
Woowèe a mʉ vʉ nè ntee tʉʼ.	They came in the middle of the night.
Máè ba ce koèñ aè rláè ntee aè buu ce aè nyoèr, máè ba láè. Ñwáè moè' ka' ce kwaè' ená e túr yuu ce aède' yi gee ená e lá ntee aè njáèá buu anaè, m túr buu anaè a caa ye.	though I myself might have confidence even in the flesh. If any other man thinks that he has confidence in the flesh, I yet more:
Beâe aè rla' Koreèn, weèr aè súèti yuu mo' ese weèe ka'. Weèr aè múè' yer ntee a lá too neè weèe.	Our mouth is open to you, Corinthians. Our heart is enlarged.
du ba' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe buèu. Tá e ka' keè duè mbe buèu e m fa ncep neè ñgaâa ntuu ce e m ce naè aè ñger Yú' Rara.	until the day in which he was received up, after he had given commandment through the Holy Spirit to the apostles whom he had chosen.
Weèe aè ka' ce kwaè'shi ená m ce yu' nyor magoèr neè ñger ce Tata Jisos Kraâis aè fa weèr naè, baná aède' m koosïì rïìtu ka'. E fa máè ñger anaè tá m bo tapsi weèe aègho, ke' ba ba ená weèr sáási weèe aègho ka'.	For though I should boast somewhat abundantly concerning our authority, (which the Lord gave for building you up, and not for casting you down) I will not be disappointed,
E m byemi yi yu ená beèe a ka' cáp ye njo' Kraâis ce Nyúè be loè tuu njep ñgoèñ na, cena yi boñ ye caa ce ená e túr bkuâ' aè to' Ijïìp wááwá. Yi m ba wa'a njobeè' e m ce keè' ba blaè' ce vi bii ka' ba.	accounting the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt; for he looked to the reward.
Beèe ce a ku ba yap aèwaèa a ke' riñ mncir ka' naè, baná Nyúè aè roè' woweèe.”	"But this multitude that doesn't know the law is accursed."""
Pol ba Baènabaès a m cu aè rla' Antïìyoèk a ce yá'ni a ker ce feè'shi blaâa Tata a ku' beèe mo' weèe.	But Paul and Barnabas stayed in Antioch, teaching and preaching the word of the Lord, with many others also.
AÈmboè weèe rïìñ wáá ená weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè kwe aèbee, baná byú' bbebep enjep ñgoèñ na vi ker túr ñger mbe weâe nduè ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèe aè ce láè mncir ce beèe a laèa ená weèe lá njoká?	If you died with Christ from the elements of the world, why, as though living in the world, do you subject yourselves to ordinances,
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “M ka' laa wa'a, faèa ba njo, aè suñ faèa anaè. Ka' ba ená máè laèa yáánïì, wáè ka' lip máè njoká?”	"Jesus answered him, ""If I have spoken evil, testify of the evil; but if well, why do you beat me?"""
Weèe gee buu wááwá aè njïû yáánïì.	Let all things be done decently and in order.
Woweèe a ka' baè' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, cor ba ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ker ba btu embe cor a konïì woweèe. Pol weèe a suñ woweèe buu ce Nyúè a geèe njïì enjep woweèe.	When they had come to Jerusalem, they were received by the assembly and the apostles and the elders, and they reported all things that God had done with them.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Koèniyuès ce e yu tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe, aè tuu weèr. E yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, a ce wáp Nyúè, Jus wááwá a ce laèa buu bboèñboñ kuu ye. Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' ce nrara aè laa neè ye ená e ká' wáè tá aè vú mbe yeâ ndaèp, tá e bo yu' yuu ce aè be laèa neè ye.”	"They said, ""Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man and one who fears God, and well spoken of by all the nation of the Jews, was directed by a holy angel to invite you to his house, and to listen to what you say."""
Baná Nyúè aè ka' byemi, seèe yá'nïì buu mo' bfi.	This will we do, if God permits.
ká' ce lïìp ñgaâa mfaè' mo', ce yeñger, ce noñger a no ñkoo weèe,	and begins to beat his fellow servants, and eat and drink with the drunkards,
Ŋwɛɛ Ŋkàr Bkwâa [ŋwɛ̄ː ŋkàɾ bkwâː] cn 7.	month of January.
Mɛ̀ sɛ̀ njobèʼ mɛ̀ fàʼ gòr.	I am tired because I have worked too much.
Baná weèe ke'ni wee btu. Nfúroè aè ka' gee yuu bebep, aè lapnïì ye. E ka' kupse, ma' yi yuu bebep anaè, aè foosïì ye.	Be careful. If your brother sins against you, rebuke him. If he repents, forgive him.
Blaèa ca vi yu mini. “Seèe ka' kwe seèe Jisoès weèe, seèe ke cu seèe woweèe.	"This saying is faithful: ""For if we died with him, we will also live with him."
Pol aè ká' tu mo', a laa neè ye enáê, “Loèr muu nsuènsuè ca du fa neè tu yïû goèr, e roèo suñ ye yuu mo'.”	"Paul summoned one of the centurions, and said, ""Bring this young man to the commanding officer, for he has something to tell him."""
Weè mo' efa woweèe a feè'shi buu kuu Jisos Kraâis njobeè' a ce ko'-ndoñ neè máè, a ce roèo aè rcaèa máè, weè mo' a ce feè'shi yap ba aè ntee boèñboñ.	Some indeed preach Christ even out of envy and strife, and some also out of good will.
Maataè aè ka' yu' ená Jisoès ce vúè, e natïì a du a koni ye aè nduunjïì. Máèári aè cu yi mbe ndaèp.	Then when Martha heard that Jesus was coming, she went and met him, but Mary stayed in the house.
Baná aè rmïìsïì, bfúr waê, weèe ce kwa'shi aèmboè buu wááwá ce vi yu bboèñboñ, a ghááte aè buu ce aède' beèe a násïì. Buu anaè yu buu ce vi yu mini, buu ce vi yu neè foèo-ñwáè, ce vi yu kuèyáá a ba brara, buu ce aède' beèe a koêñ, buu ce vi ce keè' bboèñboñ.	Finally, brothers, whatever things are true, whatever things are honorable, whatever things are just, whatever things are pure, whatever things are lovely, whatever things are of good report; if there is any virtue, and if there is any praise, think about these things.
A m koo woweèe a li' mbe shañ.	and laid hands on the apostles, and put them in public custody.
ce laèa enáê, “To e m kaè' ená e be duè kúti? E yuê? Wer bta a m kweñger war, buu wááwá aè ku cu aèmboè vi m ba káâ' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ.”	"and saying, ""Where is the promise of his coming? For, from the day that the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation."""
Máè yá rbuu rfi ba nshe nfi. Rbuu ce li m ba entombïì ba nshe ce e m ba entombïì aè m bú, rdip rgoèr li bú foñ.	I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth have passed away, and the sea is no more.
A m ká' woweèe a laa neè woweèe ená a fa ker laèa yuu mo', keèr yá'ni yuu mo' aè rlii Jisoès ka'.	They called them, and commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus.
Ñger ce Joân aè m túr aè rbaèptir beèe naè yi m loè ba ese Nyúè káè ese beèe? Beèesi aè neè máè.”	"The baptism of John--was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me."""
À kaʼ du à gee marò à lor nfè fàdiʼ rdip rli lor wɛ̀ kaʼ.	If you go near a river, beware that you shouldnʼt be carried away.
a bu' mmbo, a laa neè ye enáê, “Muu waè ce muunje ku ba yïû ñkwe, vúè la' mo mmbo mbe yeâ nduè tá e bo keè'se, cu nteèe.”	"and begged him much, saying, ""My little daughter is at the point of death. Please come and lay your hands on her, that she may be made healthy, and live."""
M túr buu magoèr ce máè ba laèa kuu weèe, keèr sa' weèe njo' buu anaè. Geewa'a, m ce suñ weèe ená ñwáè ce e m tuu máè yu ñwáè mini. M ce suñ ñgoèñ ca ba yuu ce máè yu' ese ye.”	"I have many things to speak and to judge concerning you. However he who sent me is true; and the things which I heard from him, these I say to the world."""
Ñwáâ ñgoèr anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Yaè taê, soè ce du faè dïì' muu waè kwe ka'.”	"The nobleman said to him, ""Sir, come down before my child dies."""
Weèe gheter ená weèe táá tatap du kuèntombïì, tá weèe bo ba yáánïì aè buu wááwá, keè' buu yuu mo' ka'.	Let endurance have its perfect work, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking in nothing.
Beèe a mmbaa ca a yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ntatap aè suèu embe buèu, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Vúè neè mbena.” Woweèe a ka' ce duè mbe buèu, mmbaè' vi sir woweèe a kaari a tarte. Beèe ce a m baèa woweèe naè a m yá aèmboè woweèe a ce duè.	"I heard a loud voice from heaven saying to them, ""Come up here!"" They went up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies saw them."
Wèr ye à rè bkòr e ghaʼ mɛ̀.	I have fought with him and he has surpassed me.
M ce loo neè weèe ená le rkoèñnïì li ku' du kuèntombïì, gee tá weèe yi buu Nyúè, keèr rïìñ jáá jáá efa yuu boèñboñ ba yuu bebep,	This I pray, that your love may abound yet more and more in knowledge and all discernment;
Baná yi yu boèñboñ ená beèe Nyúè ce a ce láè vi mncir, a lá ntee neè Jisoès naè, a táá tatap.	"Here is the patience of the saints, those who keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus."""
Maataè aè ka' koni Jisoès, a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, wáè mú ba aèfa ndur yaè aè mú kwe ka'.	"Therefore Martha said to Jesus, ""Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died."
Cɛ̀ʼ anà a yaa.	That dress is mine.
Máè sañ buu ca neè weèe ce weèe aè byemi neè Muu Nyúè tá weèe bo yi ená weèe aè koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	These things I have written to you who believe in the name of the Son of God, that you may know that you have eternal life, and that you may continue to believe in the name of the Son of God.
Seèe lor aè rduèñshïì, njeñwáè aè ka' du bguèu, baná e be kuè cu ba a nduu yïì, ce nduu yïì anaè a ka' ku bii nteèe, aèmboè ncir yi laèa. Nduu yïì aè ka' kwe baná e luèñ efa ncir anaè.	For the woman that has a husband is bound by law to the husband while he lives, but if the husband dies, she is discharged from the law of the husband.
Boo mnsuènsuè a m vúè, a kur yi gúèú neè bcáè', a byá' a du aègho, a tuñ.	The young men arose and wrapped him up, and they carried him out and buried him.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè shashïì bcáè' efa nyoèr, a laa enáê, “Mbuèu moè' ker ba neè seèe aè rlaèa ená ñwáè moè' ker laa yuu kuu ñwáè ca ka'.	"The high priest tore his clothes, and said, ""What further need have we of witnesses?"
Fástoès aè du a de' a yïì beèe ce a m ce cep ye, a laa enáê, “Wáè laèa wáná ñkwe Rum be sa' wo mnsa', baná a be duè yá ba ye.”	"Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council, answered, ""You have appealed to Caesar. To Caesar you shall go."""
Jisoès aè fyá' woweèe a laa enáê, “Baná yuu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Luèr ce ñgaâa mboo mndap a m maè', aè kúti ba luèr rbuu-ndap’ naè yi yu ba ená ká?	"But he looked at them, and said, ""Then what is this that is written, 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the chief cornerstone?'"
“Yaè ta aè fa buu wááwá mba máâ mmboè. Ñwáè moè' rïìñ ñwáè ce muu yu caa efa Taèr ka'. Ñwáè moè' rïìñ ñwáè ce Taèr yu caa efa muu ker ba beèe ce muu aè koèñ aè rduèñshi ye neè woweèe ka'.”	"Turning to the disciples, he said, ""All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever the Son desires to reveal him."""
Ñwáè ce e yu yeè masaè yu Tata Jisos Kraêis. E be keè laè' weèe. E be keè fa weèe buu ce e kupshi a lá neè yïì beèe.	knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ.
Weèr be naèa tu caa embe dïì' ce weèr aè ba naèa ka'. Weèr be naèa tu ba aè rfaè' ce Nyúè aè fa neè weèr. Rfaè' ce weèr ce geèe fa weâe mú yu mbeèp moè' efa rfaè' anaè.	But we will not boast beyond proper limits, but within the boundaries with which God appointed to us, which reach even to you.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ku táá tatap du ba' aè lúèsimbuèu baná ñgaèñ be luèñ.	But he who endures to the end, the same will be saved.
Sol aè natïì enjep nsheè, a ka' múè'shi mmir, a ker ce yá buu ka'. A m koo ye aè rkoo a du aègho aè rla' Daèmaskoès.	Saul arose from the ground, and when his eyes were opened, he saw no one. They led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a lá map mmbo mbe waâp nduè, woweèe a konïì Yú' Rara.	Then they laid their hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
Jisoès aè ka' yá ku' beèe, a ko' mbe rtuèu, a ka' baè' mbo, a cu aè nsheè. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a vúseè,	Seeing the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. When he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
Jus a laa neè ye enáê, “Yuu ce aède' aè gee aèmboè ncoèo aè rduèñshi weèr ená aè túr ñger aè rgeèe buu ca, yu ká?”	"The Jews therefore answered him, ""What sign do you show us, seeing that you do these things?"""
Lòr rtaa rloo sop mbe tu.	Take your cap and wear.
Jisoès aè ká' a ce suñ buu neè beèe ca aè mñgaèa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m faè' yi nsuu, a bye njáèá msini ce a ke geèe mruè' aègho, a bee ñka' a sir nsuu anaè aègho, a tuñ dïì' ce a be geèe mruè' mbo, a boo taè'taè' mbo foñ. A ka' geèe wa'a wáá, a lá nsuu anaè neè beèe mo', a du aè mbeè.	"He began to speak to them in parables. ""A man planted a vineyard, put a hedge around it, dug a pit for the winepress, built a tower, rented it out to a farmer, and went into another country."
E ka' suñ ye ená Jisoès aè ba kwe wáá, e laa neè Josáèf ená e du lor gúâú Jisoès.	When he found out from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.
Njeñwáè moè' aè m ba aèfo ce e m cu mbe kuèu aè bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	A certain woman, who had an issue of blood for twelve years,
Nyúè aè m geèe mñkaè'ni anaè, a laa enáê, “Nfeè' be gháá tá m kúti; tá Sáèra bi muu mbañruè.”	"For this is a word of promise, ""At the appointed time I will come, and Sarah will have a son."""
Yar neè buu bïìr wááwá ce Nyúè aè fa weèe tá weèe bo tami nyor aè rmaè' bïìr aègho, faè dïì' Sataèn bo' weèe neè bfee kwáèá ka'.	Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
Mbàni mi bòŋ kaʼ.	Enmity is not good.
E be ba njeñwáè ce beèe a rïìñ ye aè mi mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ. E be ba njeñwáè ce e m ce keè' aè boo vi boèñboñ, a ce koni beèe mbe yeâ ndaèp boèñboñ, a ce su'si mkuèu beèe Nyúè, a ce jaè' ñgaâa ñgá', a ce fa nyor aè rgeèe mfaè' wááwá ce mi yu mmboèñmboñ.	being approved by good works, if she has brought up children, if she has been hospitable to strangers, if she has washed the saints' feet, if she has relieved the afflicted, and if she has diligently followed every good work.
Cena yi yu wa'a njobeè' a m boo Adaèm entombïì neè EÊf.	For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
Cɛ̀ʼ anà zhi ghɛɛ wɛ̀ sê.	That dress fits you very well.
Geewa'a, Jus a ka' kani ená a fa maè'shi máè ka', máè boñlaèr a laa máná wa mnsa' be sa' ñkwe Ruêm. Máè m laèa wa'a, a ke' túr yuu bebep mo' aè rlaèa kuu yaè beèe ka'.	But when the Jews spoke against it, I was constrained to appeal to Caesar, not that I had anything about which to accuse my nation.
Beèe a be keè koèñ wap mnyor, koèñ mbaèa seê, ce yu' nyor, keèr ce suñni nyor, ce cápni. Boo foñ a be keè teèe btu neè wap mma ba wap btaê. Beèe a be keè ce yoèñshi beèe aè buu bboèñboñ ce a geèe neè woweèe ka', ce geèe mntuèp buu.	For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boastful, arrogant, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy,
Mrù ̀ ʼ2 [mɾùʔ] n 1a.	day of the traditional week.
Woweèe a ka' duè yá Jisoès, a bu' mmbo neè ye neè mini-ñwáè a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè ghááte aè ñwáè ce wáè ba geèe yuu ce e laèa na neè ye,	"When they came to Jesus, they begged him earnestly, saying, ""He is worthy for you to do this for him,"
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce jáèr ce de' ba aèmboè ká?” Woweèe a táá neè ñkoosimnse-ñwáè.	"He said to them, ""What are you talking about as you walk, and are sad?"""
Weèr Jisoès weèe aè m ba mbe rtuèu ce Nyúè aè m laèa mbo anaè, a yu' njeèndoñ ce e m laèa embe buèu naè.	We heard this voice come out of heaven when we were with him on the holy mountain.
E ghɛɛte à ŋkʉʉ à toʼ na ghup.	He is really qualified to be the chief of this village.
Ñwáè aè ka' koosimnse aè njáèá njïì ce Nyúè koèñ, baná ñkoosimnse ca be geèe tá ñgaèñ kupse, ma' yïì buu bbebep, luèñ. AÈde' ñwáè señ buu ená e geèe yuu bebep aè njáèá njïì ce e ce koosimnse wa' ka'. Ñkoosimnse yïì beèe enjep ñgoèñ na e ke vúè ba neè rkwe.	For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, which brings no regret. But the sorrow of the world works death.
Naèa neè mbúè mbaèa ce a ke maè' mbaâa baèraè' aègho.” Woweèe a vú neè mbúè mbaèa, a fa neè ye.	"Show me the tax money."" They brought to him a denarius."
Mmbañruè ce a m ba aèfo a m ba aèmboè ncúèkïì taê. Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Laèa neè tá woweèe a cute aè nsheè aè bkúr aè bkúr tá beèe a ba mbe kúr e mo'sir aèmboè beèe mta wa'a.”	"For they were about five thousand men. He said to his disciples, ""Make them sit down in groups of about fifty each."""
Yi m ba ená bár beèe mo' a ba'ni plaêñ, tá bár mo' a ba'ni bbaèbaèr keñ ce e m saè'ñger naè. A m geèe wa'a, weèr woweèe wááwá aè du a ba' nje waa ñkúè, yuu mo' yi joo ñwáè moè' ka'.	and the rest should follow, some on planks, and some on other things from the ship. So it happened that they all escaped safely to the land.
Ñwáè ce e ce geèe yuu mini, e ke vúè faèdïì' rraa li yu tá beèe a bo yá rara ená e ce geèe ba yuu ce Nyúè koèñ.”	"But he who does the truth comes to the light, that his works may be revealed, that they have been done in God."""
AÈde' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú duñshi yuu bebep ce máè geèe a? Máè ka' ce suñ weèe ba yuu mini, weèe aè byemïì neè máè ka' njoká?	Which of you convicts me of sin? If I tell the truth, why do you not believe me?
Laèa neè mmbañruè ce a yu bleebeèe ená woweèe a túr ba ntee bobor, ke' lor buu aètáèr ka; kwa'shi buu neè bfee-ñwáè; byemi neè Jisos Kraâis neè mini- ñwáè, koñ beèe, táá tatap.	that older men should be temperate, sensible, sober minded, sound in faith, in love, and in patience:
Muu ca rìŋ à rŋyɛ̀ɛ enje kùu.	This child knows how to run very fast.
Hároèd ba Pailáèt a m koo ñkar nyúè anaè. Tá a ye a ka' koo ñkar nyúè anaè, a ye a m baèni seê.	Herod and Pilate became friends with each other that very day, for before that they were enemies with each other.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe enje jáá ce a byemi, weèr aè sañ ñwaè' neè woweèe a suñ yuu ce weèr aè cu aèbee a laêa. Weèr aè laèa werná woweèe a fa ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ka', borni efa rye bláá ba mnyaèa ce a toosi mndoñ efa gho, borni bsaèkïì.”	"But concerning the Gentiles who believe, we have written our decision that they should observe no such thing, except that they should keep themselves from food offered to idols, from blood, from strangled things, and from sexual immorality."""
Nyúè aè m suñ war Abraèham ená Aisïìk a ñwáè ce e be káè' geèe tá yïì ñgúè yaa.	"even he to whom it was said, ""In Isaac will your seed be called;"""
Jasïìn aè koo woweèe a lá mbe yeâ ndaèp. Woweèe a ce bú' mncir Sisaè aè njïì ce a ce laa ená ñkúú moè' ker ba, a ce too ená Jisoès.”	"whom Jason has received. These all act contrary to the decrees of Caesar, saying that there is another king, Jesus!"""
Woweèe a m ce keè' ená bo yi ka' tá kuè ko' ye mbe dïì' ka', baná e be kuè loè co'ti gweè aè nsheè, kwe. Woweèe a cu nfeè' njïìsaèp seê, a yá yuu mo' yi gee ye ka', woweèe a kupseè map mkwaè'shïì a laa enáê, “E yu nyúè moè'.”	But they expected that he would have swollen or fallen down dead suddenly, but when they watched for a long time and saw nothing bad happen to him, they changed their minds, and said that he was a god.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe yi yuu ce weèe ce bipshi ka'. AÈde' weèe no enjep ndoñ ce m be no enjo a? Káè aède' weèe koo njáèá baèptir ce m be koo a?”	"But Jesus said to them, ""You don't know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I drink, and to be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?"""
E laa enáê, “Yá neè, máè yá aèmboè rbuu li múè'ti, máè yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e táá aè rkoo maâ' Nyúè.”	"and said, ""Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God!"""
E koo a ye a waâp bsii.	He took them, and ate in front of them.
ba Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ce e m loè a fyeni Jisoès naè.	and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. He came into a house.
Woweèe a ka' ba beèe Hibruès, baná m yu moè' foñ. Woweèe a ka' ba' beèe Isráèl, baná m yu moè' foñ. Woweèe a ka' ba beèe embe ndúè' Abraèhaêm, baná m yu moè' foñ.	Are they Hebrews? So am I. Are they Israelites? So am I. Are they the seed of Abraham? So am I.
Jisoès aè m ká' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, a fa woweèe ñger ená woweèe a ce fúr byú' bbebep enjep beèe, ker gee tá beèe ce a ce yañ byañ njáèá jáá jáèá jáá a ke'se.	He called to himself his twelve disciples, and gave them authority over unclean spirits, to cast them out, and to heal every disease and every sickness.
Wɛ̌ tɛr ŋkàa anà à naŋsì bòŋboŋ fàdìʼ mbùuŋgʉp enjoo mi bʉʼŋger kaʼ.	When you are keeping that basket, do it carefully so that the eggs placed inside should not be broken.
Yi yu mini ená yuu mo' yi yu ce aède' m buu efa rgeèe ka'. Geewa'a, yu buu wááwá ce vi ce jaè' ka'. Ka' yuu mo' yi yu ce aède' m buu efa rgeèe ka' wa'a, aètaè m ke' byemi máná yuu mo' yi túr ñger mbe máâ nduè tá m lo ba ñkwaèa neè yuu anaè ka'.	"All things are lawful for me, but not all things are expedient. ""All things are lawful for me,"" but I will not be brought under the power of anything."
Seèe rïìñ seená yi yu aètáèr neè ñwáè aè rkwe aètu ñwáè moè' ka'; ka' ñgaèñ aè ka' ba ñwáâ nyáánïì áè. Seemoè' aède' ñwáè ku byemi ená e be kwe aètu ñwáè ce yïì ndeèe boèñ seê.	For one will hardly die for a righteous man. Yet perhaps for a righteous person someone would even dare to die.
Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá ñgá' ba goèr seê, ba ba njáèá ñgá' ce e m be ba ka', ká' embe nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ, ba' seè'ni na, ñgá' moè' be keèr ba wa' ka'.	For in those days there will be oppression, such as there has not been the like from the beginning of the creation which God created until now, and never will be.
M ce fa weèe ncir ce fi ená weèe koèñni. Weèe koñni foñ aèmboè máè m koèñ weèe naè.	A new commandment I give to you, that you love one another, just like I have loved you; that you also love one another.
E m bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e fa juèu woweâe aè dïì' anaè ka'.	He begged him much that he would not send them away out of the country.
Máè m duè njobeè' Nyúè aè m laèa neè máè ená m duê. Máè ka' duè baè', a suñ woweèe yuu ce máè m ce feè'shi neè beèe enje jáá. Máè m ku suñ ba beèe ce a m ba btu embe cor caè'caè'. Máè m suñ woweèe faè dïì' rfaè' ce máè m geèe ker ba lïì ce m ce geèe seè'ni, mi bo bú aè cicïì ka'.	I went up by revelation, and I laid before them the Good News which I preach among the Gentiles, but privately before those who were respected, for fear that I might be running, or had run, in vain.
Nyúè aè m yá ená weèr aè ghááte, a ka' fa Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca mba weâr mmboè. Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèr aè ce feè'shi blaèa ca tá nyor bo boèñ ñwáè ka'; wer ce feè'shi tá nyor bo boèñ ba Nyúè ce e ke fyá' wer mntee.	But even as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the Good News, so we speak; not as pleasing men, but God, who tests our hearts.
Baná weèe fa buumi ka' njobeè' weèe rïìñ nfeè' ce ñwáè ndap be vúè ka'. Seemoè' e be vúè aè mbuèuñkuèr, káè neè ntee-tú', káè aè nfeè' ntooñgúp yi toñ, káè aè nfeè' túè' aè raa áè.	Watch therefore, for you don't know when the lord of the house is coming, whether at evening, or at midnight, or when the rooster crows, or in the morning;
Weèe yu njep weâr mntee aèmboè ñwaè' ce a sañ, ñwáè wááwá aè ce beè', a riñ yuu ce a sañ mbo wa'a,	You are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all men;
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ku bii ñgaâa bbaèa neè Nyúè, muu yïì aè gee seèe Nyúè weèe aè kútïì aèbee njo' li rkwe. Yi ka' ba ená seèe Nyúè weèe aè kútïì aèbee, baná yi yu mini ená seèe be luèñ njobeè' e cu nteèe.	For if, while we were enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we will be saved by his life.
Nfeè' ce a m ce ye Ñkaâ' Haènukaè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè m gháá. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce saa aè m ya'ni.	It was the Feast of the Dedication at Jerusalem.
Yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ ese weèe yi yu ená weèe cu ba njáèá rcu ce li ce duèñshi ená weèe aè fa wee mntee neè Nyúè. Weèe fa ba ñgaâa mká'ni ka'.	For this is the will of God: your sanctification, that you abstain from sexual immorality,
Ñgúè' nyor moè' ka' ce yá ñgá', baná mñgúè' nyor wááwá vi be yá ñgá'. Ñgúè' nyor moè' ka' ce yu' rboèñ baná mñgúè' nyor wááwá vi be yu' rboèñ.	When one member suffers, all the members suffer with it. Or when one member is honored, all the members rejoice with it.
Woweèe a wáp seê, a laa fa waâp mú ená, “Ñwáè ca a nda seê, ce fu' yi ce yu'ni neè ye, rdip li ce yu'ni neè ye foñ na?”	"They were greatly afraid, and said to one another, ""Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"""
Woweèe a m fa máè ñger aèmboè a m ce fa weèe naè. Njáèá beâe wa'a yu beèe ce a ba yu'ni neè woweèe.	For they refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore acknowledge those who are like that.
tá beèe ce a ce nya' mnde' ená woweèe a yu ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a nyáá, bo' beèe magoèr tá a da'.	Many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ker ba bfúr ce a m ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a m yu' ená beèe enje jáá a yu' blaâa Nyúè a byemi.	Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles had also received the word of God.
tá ñwáè ce e koèñ aè rba entombïì ba ñkwaèa neè beèe wááwá.	Whoever of you wants to become first among you, shall be bondservant of all.
Yi ba ená seèe ku ce jár seè'ni ba njep mkuèu ce seèe ce jáèshi njo na.	Nevertheless, to the extent that we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule. Let us be of the same mind.
Jisoès aè ka' loè embe ndaèp anaè, beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ká' a ce laèa bebep se aèmboè ye, a bipshi ku' buu neè ye,	As he said these things to them, the scribes and the Pharisees began to be terribly angry, and to draw many things out of him;
Woweèe a nati a du a du a suñ yap yu yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe neè woweèe naè aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoèñ anaè.	But they went out and spread abroad his fame in all that land.
Yuu ce ñwáè ce e m tuu máè koèñ, yi yu ená ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe ce e fa mba máâ mmboè bú ka', tá m bo geèe tá woweèe a fúú efa rkwe aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu.	This is the will of my Father who sent me, that of all he has given to me I should lose nothing, but should raise him up at the last day.
e cu aèfo aè mnoèñ mkyeèe, Sataèn aè ce moèoshi ye. E m ye yuu ka' aè mnoèñ anaè. Mnoèñ anaè vi ka' mïì, njeè aè yañ ye seê.	for forty days, being tempted by the devil. He ate nothing in those days. Afterward, when they were completed, he was hungry.
Rbyemïì ce li buu ndeâe mboèñmboñ li ku ba aèmboè gúâú ñwáè wa'a.	For as the body apart from the spirit is dead, even so faith apart from works is dead.
Seèe fa naèa tu ka', seèe fa geèe tá ntee yi bep ñwáè moè' ka', seèe fa ko'ndoñ neè ñwáè moè' ka'.	Let's not become conceited, provoking one another, and envying one another.
Njeŋwɛ̀ ca rìŋ à rkupshi bzhee sê.	This woman knows how to prepare food very well.
Ñwáè rgaèpshïì aè yu'shïì mdip ce mi m beèeñger aè mruè' na, a riñ faèdïì' mi loè ka'. Geewa'a ñgaâa mfaè' a m rïìñ faèdïì' mi m loè. E ká' nduèu guèu,	When the ruler of the feast tasted the water now become wine, and didn't know where it came from (but the servants who had drawn the water knew), the ruler of the feast called the bridegroom,
Jisoès aè ka' kúti, kúr beèe a konïì ye, njobeè' woweèe wááwá a m cu a ce keè' ye.	It happened, when Jesus returned, that the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
Weèr aè m gheèter se ená weèr aè ba koni fáñ vúè caè'ni weèe. Máâ Poêl, máè gheteèr nfeè' aèñgoo seê, Sataèn aè ka' jepsi weèr efa rvúè.	because we wanted to come to you--indeed, I, Paul, once and again--but Satan hindered us.
E m maè' ñgaèa anaè enáê, “Ñwáè nsa' mnsa' moè' aè m ba aè rla' mo' a ce wáp Nyúè ka', a ker ce loèr beèe aè yuu ka'.	"saying, ""There was a judge in a certain city who didn't fear God, and didn't respect man."
Ntaangu ca tʉr kor kaʼ.	This stick does not have a node.
E m ce faè' neè govanoè ce a m ce too ená Saèjoès Poloès. AÈ m ba ñwáè ce e m túr bfee seê. E m tuu beèe ená a du ká' Baènabaès ba Soêl, njobeè' e m koèñ aè ryu' blaâa Nyúè.	who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, a man of understanding. This man summoned Barnabas and Saul, and sought to hear the word of God.
E m geèe wa'a, a ja' beèe ce a m ba bkwaèa njobeè' a m ce wáp rkwe.	and might deliver all of them who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage.
Boo vi a ke kèʼse.	Her children crave always for food.
À kaʼ yɛ ŋgɛʼ sèʼni, banɛ à be kèe yɛ rbòŋ àlʉ̀simbùu.	If you suffer now, you will enjoy in the end.
AÈde' ñwáè saa cáâ' fi, tar mbenduè yïû rúèú ka'. E ka' gee wa'a, baná cáâ' fi ca yi be saèa yïû rúèú tá toto raa caèa yïì entoèmbïì naè.	No one puts a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment; for the patch would tear away from the garment, and a worse hole is made.
Mnoèñ vi ka' caèa ntuunfu, Jisoès aè lor Pitaè ba Jáêms, ba Joân ce e m ba nfúr Jáêms, a woweèe a ko' mbe rtuâu rsaèsap, aè ku ba woweèe mbo caè'caè'.	After six days, Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John his brother, and brought them up into a high mountain by themselves.
Nyúè aè fa ñgwaguèu anaè bcáâ' bbúú ce vi ce raa a ce laè'ñger seê, ená e yar.” Bcáè' ca vi táá aètu mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ ce beèe Nyúè a geèe.	It was given to her that she would array herself in bright, pure, fine linen: for the fine linen is the righteous acts of the saints.
Mɛ̀ saa ŋguu nè njàa.	I have split firewood with an axe.
Weèe loo weená buu ca vi fa koni aè cuâu saa ka'.	Pray that your flight won't be in the winter.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, Yú' Nyúè yi ka' ba njep weâe mntee ghup, baná weèe be keèr láè ntee ba aè buu ce ñwáè e ke koèñ aè rgeèe ka', wee be láè ntee ba aè buu Yú' Nyúè. Ñwáè aè ka' tá túr Yú' Kraâis ka', baná ñwáè anaè yu yïì ñwáè ka'.	But you are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if it is so that the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man doesn't have the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.
Yuu ce yi yu tatap yi yu ená weèe riñ ená yu ba ñwáè moè'sir ce e be saèr blaâa ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ka'.	knowing this first, that no prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation.
Yi m ba ená Nyúè aè m suèusi Yú' Rara mbe tu Jisoès, a ce ye, a fa ye ñger. E m duè aè bdïì' wááwá a ce geèe buu bboèñboñ a ce geèe beèe wááwá ce nyúèrkaè' aè m túr ñger mbe waâp nduè a ce luèñ, njobeè' Nyúè aè m ba a ye.	even Jesus of Nazareth, how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who went about doing good and healing all who were oppressed by the devil, for God was with him.
Nfʉr zhì yu muurlii.	His brother is an important person.
Beèe magoèr a be beè'ni ndeâe mbembep ca, geèe tá beèe a laa bebep aèmboè nduunjïì ce mini.	Many will follow their immoral ways, and as a result, the way of the truth will be maligned.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa keè'ni Ndap Nyúè a ka' yá ye, a waani enáê, “Taa ye mbe kïìntaa! Taa ye mbe kïìntaa!” Pailáèt aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Koo laè neè ye du taa mbe kïìntaa. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, máè yá faèa ce e geèe ka'.”	"When therefore the chief priests and the officers saw him, they shouted, saying, ""Crucify! Crucify!"" Pilate said to them, ""Take him yourselves, and crucify him, for I find no basis for a charge against him."""
A m cete yaèp ñguèñ neè bco' ce ñgaâa maè' bïìr a ke cete ñguèñ aègho, wap bbaèp vi ce coèo aèmboè njáèá mutuè mntaañguu ce ñgaâa maè' bïìr a ke duè bïìr cu mbo, mnyaèabaèraè' vi ce súèñ naè.	They had breastplates, like breastplates of iron. The sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots, or of many horses rushing to war.
Mɛ̀ lèʼ a rzhe kwâa ŋkaŋ.	I have vowed not to eat fried beans.
Seèe rïìñ seená blaâa Nyúè vi ke kupse ka'. Baná aèmboè Nyúè aè m laèa ená beèe ce e laèa blaèa ca neè woweèe a yu aèmboè ye naè,	If he called them gods, to whom the word of God came (and the Scripture can't be broken),
Weèe a ka' duñshi ená weèe aè yu'ni neè Jisos Kraâis neè ye ntee-ñwáè, weèr fa ñgá' neè beèe ce a teèe btu.	and being in readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience will be made full.
Rbyemïì li geèe seèe aè riñ rara ená Nyúè aè m ku laa laèa, ñgoèñ yi ba aègho. Baná yuu ce seèe ce yá neè mmir yi m loè ba efa yuu ce aède' seèe yá neè mmir ka'.	By faith, we understand that the universe has been framed by the word of God, so that what is seen has not been made out of things which are visible.
Yu njo' ye ce seèe ce seèe woweèe yu ñwáè moè'sir aè koni fáñ aè rvúè aègee Nyúè, táá a yeâ bsii neè ñger-ñwáè njobeè' seèe aè byemi neè ye.	in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through our faith in him.
Boo wa ce máè koèñ neè ya ntee wááwá, m ker ce yá ñgá' a weâe btuè aèmboè njeñwáè ce e ce luuti wa'a. M be kuè ce yá ñgá' wa'a caar tá weèe lor ba ñgeèe Jisos Kraêis.	My little children, of whom I am again in travail until Christ is formed in you--
Wer btarkú a m ce duè rloo mbe rtuâu aèfa na, weèe a ce laèa ye ená dïì' ce aède' beèe a du rloo ku ba ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.”	"Our fathers worshiped in this mountain, and you Jews say that in Jerusalem is the place where people ought to worship."""
e m kwaè'shi war, a gee ená seèe ba boo vi njo' rfaè' ce Jisos Kraâis be vúè geèe neè seèe. Nyúè aè m geèe ca njobeè' aè m ba yuu ce yi m boèñ ye, e koñ aè rgeèe.	having predestined us for adoption as children through Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his desire,
Wèr à vʉ̀ e ba nè dû.	when we came he had already gone.
Jus ce a m vúèse aè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na a m ce cu aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè nfeè' anaè. AÈ m ba beèe ce a fa yap ntee neè Nyúè.	Now there were dwelling in Jerusalem Jews, devout men, from every nation under the sky.
Saimúèn aè suñ aèmboè Nyúè aè m káè' a duñshi ntee ce e m láè njep beèe enje jáá a fúr beèe mo' efa woweèe aè yïì beèe.	Simeon has reported how God first visited the nations, to take out of them a people for his name.
E ka' naèa bo mbekïì ená woweèe a cu múnyañ, a suñ woweèe aèmboè Tata aè fúr ye embe shañ. E ka' mïìsi, a laa enáê, “Suñ neè buu ca neè Jáêms, ba bfúr mo' ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì.” E laa wa'a, a fúú, a du aè dïû' mo'.	"But he, beckoning to them with his hand to be silent, declared to them how the Lord had brought him out of the prison. He said, ""Tell these things to James, and to the brothers."" Then he departed, and went to another place."
A muu wàa.	She is my child.
Woweèe a ka' laèa wa'a, a de' a Saèkaèriyaè weèe neè mmbo, a bipshi neè ye ená e koèñ aè rcu' ba nda lá.	They made signs to his father, what he would have him called.
Weèr aè m caèasi nfeè' aè nduunjïì goèr seê. Rjáèr li m ba neè mluè-ñwáè seê, njobeè' noèñ ce a ke tañshi tañshïû goèr yi m caèa, aè m ba aè cuèu saa.	When much time had passed and the voyage was now dangerous, because the Fast had now already gone by, Paul admonished them,
Yïì gúè yu mba yeâ boè, ce e be fyápshi msañ aègho, baashi msañ láè njep koo. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè bbúèshïì efa gho, e be baashi toèo njep mor ce aède' yi liitïì ka'.”	"whose fan is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor, and will gather the wheat into his barn; but he will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire."""
Byú' bbebep ca vi bu' mmbo neè Jisoès enáê, “Maè'shi tá weèr du niñ aè múè ñkuânyaèm ca, niñ njep múè mo.”	"All the demons begged him, saying, ""Send us into the pigs, that we may enter into them."""
Woweèe a káè' a ce sár mnsár foñ ená ñwáè ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr efa waâp mú yu nda lá?	There arose also a contention among them, which of them was considered to be greatest.
AÈmboè noèñ anaè aè m ba noèñ ce a m ce tami nyor tá a bo fúú cu mmbomntaa Nyúè, Jus a m ce koèñ ená bgúâú beèe vi cu mbe kïìntaa ka'. Mmbomntaa anaè aè m ba mïû goèr. Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a du a laa neè Pailáèt ená e ma'shi tá woweèe a kepshi mkuèu ese beèe anaè, tá a bo yaèñse kweñger tá a ca'si efa bsii.	Therefore the Jews, because it was the Preparation Day, so that the bodies wouldn't remain on the cross on the Sabbath (for that Sabbath was a special one), asked of Pilate that their legs might be broken, and that they might be taken away.
Rcaè'nïì ca aè sañ máâ Pol neè ya bo. Máè ku sañ aèmboè má ke sañ mbe wa mñwaè' wááwá naè, tá weèe bo rïìñ ená aè sañ máè.	The greeting of me, Paul, with my own hand, which is the sign in every letter: this is how I write.
Bfúr waê, yi ka' ba wa'a, ka' ba aè nfeè' weèe aè vúè aèbee aè rye byee Nyúè, beèe mo' a fa kuè káè' ce ye entombïì neè beèe moè' ka'.	Therefore, my brothers, when you come together to eat, wait for one another.
Mboè weèe aè rïìñ ená beèe Nyúè a be keè sa' ñgoèñ ca a? Ka' ba ená ñgoèñ ca be keè sa' weèe, waè' baná weèe aè ghááte aè rsa' mú mnsa' ce vi yu a weâe mú ka' a?	Don't you know that the saints will judge the world? And if the world is judged by you, are you unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
Ryʉr li bòŋ wɛ̀.	Fortune has smiled on you.
Ntaandʉŋ à dù kùna.	Ntandung has gone up there.
Woweèe a ká' a ce ker ye, a tuu ñgaâa ñker ená a du bo'shi ená a yu ñgaâa laèayá. Woweèe a ka' duè a ce keè' ená Jisoès laa mú yuu mo' bebep, tá a bo koo ye fa mbe mmbo govanoè.	They watched him, and sent out spies, who pretended to be righteous, that they might trap him in something he said, so as to deliver him up to the power and authority of the governor.
Nyúè yu yú'. Baná beèe ce a ce loo neè ye a be kuè loo aè yú' ker ba aè mini.”	"God is spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth."""
Kɛ̀ e dù ɛ̀, mɛ̀ nase a riŋ kaʼ.	I donʼt actually know whether has gone.
Bfúr waê, yi ku ba neè weèe wa' foñ. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè ñger ce mncir vi túr mbe weâe nduè, yi yu seè'ni ená weèe aè kwe, njobeè' weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu aè ñwáè moè'sir. Yi yu seè'ni na ená weèe cu njeptii nduu moè' jáá, ce e yu Kraâis ce Nyúè aè m fúr efa rkwe tá seèe bo geèe buu bboèñboñ neè Nyúè.	Therefore, my brothers, you also were made dead to the law through the body of Christ, that you would be joined to another, to him who was raised from the dead, that we might bring forth fruit to God.
Bfúr waê, weèe rïìñ ená Stáfánaès ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp a m ba beèe entombïì efa múè beâe aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè ce a m beèeñger aè ñgaâa rbyemïì. Woweèe a m fa waêp mnyor aè rjaè' beèe Nyúè.	Now I beg you, brothers (you know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruits of Achaia, and that they have set themselves to serve the saints),
A seèe beèe ce Nyúè aè ká' ená a ba yïì beèe anaè. E ku ká' beèe ba efa múè Jus ka', e ká' beèe enje jáá foñ.	us, whom he also called, not from the Jews only, but also from the Gentiles?
Maataè aè laa neè ye enáê, “M rïìñ máná e be fúú efa rkwe aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu ce beèe wááwá a be keè fúú efa rkwe naè.”	"Martha said to him, ""I know that he will rise again in the resurrection at the last day."""
Baná wee weèe kur ntee wa' foñ. Tami neè nyor, táá tatap ce ke', njobeè' nfeè' múcaèr tá yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis vúê.	You also be patient. Establish your hearts, for the coming of the Lord is at hand.
Máè m sañ ñwaè' anaè tá m bo moèoshi weèe, yá máná waè' weèe ce yu'ni neè máè aè buu bsïìp lá.	For to this end I also wrote, that I might know the proof of you, whether you are obedient in all things.
Beèe wááwá efa laè' anaè a vú a táá njep ncúèúndúè'.	All the city was gathered together at the door.
Ñwáè soogáè moè' aè sop mbeèp nyor ese Jisoès neè rkoèñ, mdip ba bláá mi ku fúú aè cuèu anaè.	However one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and immediately blood and water came out.
Rbyemïì li m geèe Abraèham aè yu'nïì neè Nyúè. Nyúè aè m ká' ye a laa neè ye ená e nati du faèdïì' ce e be fa neè ye. E lo efa yeâ to' a ce duè, a ke' riñ faèdïì' ce e ce duè ka'.	By faith, Abraham, when he was called, obeyed to go out to the place which he was to receive for an inheritance. He went out, not knowing where he went.
A m taa byáèá a baa mbe bkïìntaa foñ. Moè' aè ba aè yi bo maè', moè' aè bo ñkoèp.	With him they crucified two robbers; one on his right hand, and one on his left.
Ka' beèe ce a vúè na, a ba suñ faèa ce máè m geèe ka' keè táá mbe kansuèr.	Or else let these men themselves say what injustice they found in me when I stood before the council,
AÈde' seèe lor cena ba aèmboè ñgaèa wa'a. Bbyeèñge a baa ce a too ená Hagaè ba Sáèra na a táá aètu bleâ' bbaa. Hagaè táá aètu leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye a Musïìs mbe rtuèu Sinaèi aè nfeè' ce e m fa mncir neè Musïìs naè. Boo wááwá ce a yu njeptii leè' ca a ku ba bkwaèa.	These things contain an allegory, for these are two covenants. One is from Mount Sinai, bearing children to bondage, which is Hagar.
Jisoès aè ka' duè fúú nje waâa roè, a yá ku' beèe, a koosimnse neè woweèe, a gee beèe efa waâp mú ce a m ce yañ, a ke'seè.	Jesus went out, and he saw a great multitude. He had compassion on them, and healed their sick.
Yi yu foñ ená beèe wááwá a yu boo Abraèham njobeè' woweèe a yu beèe embe ndúè' Abraèham ka'. Nyúè aè m laèa neè Abraèham enáê, “Boo ce a be láè lo rlii be ba boo Aisïìk.”	"Neither, because they are Abraham's seed, are they all children. But, ""In Isaac will your seed be called."""
E koʼsi mgʉ̌ʼndap anà cɛrcɛr sê.	He has built up the walls of that house very fast.
Be keè ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a fúú efa rkwe tá beèe a ker loèr bbyeèñge káè guèusi boo ka'; beèe a be keè ba aèmboè bcïìndap Nyúè embe buèu.	For when they will rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like angels in heaven.
Beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep, a riñ mncir Nyúè ka', a be bú, ka' a be keè sa' woweèe neè mncir ka' wa'a. Beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep a riñ mncir Nyúè naè, Nyúè be sa' woweèe neè mncir anaè.	For as many as have sinned without law will also perish without the law. As many as have sinned under the law will be judged by the law.
Tu yïû goèr yi sañ ñwaè' foñ enáê,	He wrote a letter like this:
Nyúè aè fa weèe njïì ená weèe fa kuè byemi neè Jisos Kraâis byemi ka', e fa ená weèe yá ñgá' a yeâ tuè foñ.	Because it has been granted to you on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer on his behalf,
a lor seè'ni ba ñgeâe fi. Nyúè ce e m boo weèe aè beâe bfi ca ce kupshi ye ñgeèe ca tá yi bo ba aèmboè ñgeèe yi, tá weèe bo rïìñ ye boèñboñ.	and have put on the new man, who is being renewed in knowledge after the image of his Creator,
Geewa'a, m ka' caasi nfeè', tá ñwaè' ca yi bo geèe tá beèe a riñ njáèá ñgeèe ce a ba geèe aè múè beèe Nyúè. Beèe Nyúè ca yu cor Nyúè ce e yu nteèe. Cor ca yu aèmboè rkïì ce li ghashi buu ce vi yu mini.	but if I wait long, that you may know how men ought to behave themselves in the house of God, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth.
Bfúr wa ce máè koèñ seê, m ce cep weèe máná ñwáè wááwá ba cárcár aè ryu' buu, lor nfeè' ka' laa yuu, ker lor nfeè' ka' cápshi nyor.	So, then, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, and slow to anger;
Mi mkùu mi sàpŋger sê.	His legs are very long.
Mbʉ yer zhi kweŋger wɛɛ.	Our goats are all dead.
Mɛ̀ ku bii bɛ̀ɛ yuu ce e ba laa nà.	I am still surprised at what he said.
Yi yu rara ená e m vúè ba aè rjaè' bcïìndap Nyúè ka', e m vúè ba aè rjaè' ñgúè Abraèhaêm.	For most certainly, he doesn't give help to angels, but he gives help to the seed of Abraham.
Yuu ce máè suñ wáè na yi be keè geèeti aè nfeè' ce yi ba geèeti, geewa'a, aèmboè wáè byemi ka' baná aè be keèr laèa ka' káâ', ntïìni du ba' mbe nfeè' ce yuu ca yi be geèeti.”	"Behold, you will be silent and not able to speak, until the day that these things will happen, because you didn't believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their proper time."""
Baná weèe loo neè Taèr ce e túr ñkúè ená e tuusi ñgaâa mfaè' tá a du kep yïì buu efa mñkúè.”	"Pray therefore that the Lord of the harvest will send out laborers into his harvest."""
Ryoèñ li m vúè ba ese yi. Ryoèñ anaè li m ba rraa neè beèe.	In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
Fa kani neè Yú' Rara efa rfaè' njep weèe ka',	Don't quench the Spirit.
E beesïì enáê, “Tataê, máè tami nyor aè rduè shañ weèe soè, keèr kwe weèe soè.”	"He said to him, ""Lord, I am ready to go with you both to prison and to death!"""
Woweèe a m ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Jisoès aè ce duè kuèntombïì neè woweèe. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ce báèáñger. Beèe ce a m ce jáèr mbe waâp njïì a ce wáp. Jisoès aè ker fúr yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú embe múè beèe, a ká' a ce suñ woweèe buu ce vi be koni ye.	They were on the way, going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus was going in front of them, and they were amazed; and those who followed were afraid. He again took the twelve, and began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him.
Jisoès aè ká' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce koosimnse neè beèe ca seê. Weèr woweèe aè cu aè mnoâñ btaar, woweèe a ke' koni yuu ye ka'. M ce koèñ aè rlaèa tá woweèe a du neè njeè ka' faè dïì' woweèe a du gweè njeè aè nduunjïì ka'.”	"Jesus summoned his disciples and said, ""I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days and have nothing to eat. I don't want to send them away fasting, or they might faint on the way."""
E m jaè' woweèe a sár mnsár a Jus weèe aèwañ tatap seê, a ce fyá' mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè, a ce duèñshi woweèe ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè. E ka' sár wa'a, a so woweèe.	for he powerfully refuted the Jews, publicly showing by the Scriptures that Jesus was the Christ.
E kùʼsi mʉ zhì ndap cà.	He has increased that his small house.
Seèe wááwá be keè táá kuèntombïì neè Kraêis, tá e bo sa' seèe, tá ñwáè wááwá koo yuu ce yi ghááte aè yuu ce e m geèe aè nfeè' ce e m ce cu neè nyor ca njep ñgoèñ na, káè yuu anaè yi m boèñ áè, káè yi m bep áè.	For we must all be revealed before the judgment seat of Christ; that each one may receive the things in the body, according to what he has done, whether good or bad.
E m laèa enáê, “Beèe ce Nyúè aè foèosi woweèe efa wap bsaèrbuu a ma' yaèp buu bbebep anaè, a yu ñgaâa mboâñtu.	"Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, whose sins are covered.
Romans	Ruêm	4	8	Ñwáè ce Tata Nyúè be keèr ce beè' buu bbebep ce ñgaèñ aè m geèe ka', yu ñwáâ rboâñtu.”	Blessed is the man whom the Lord will by no means charge with sin."
A ce maè' woweèe njo wa'a tá beèe ce a yu byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè a sañ aèmboè nyúè wa' mbe dïì' kúú yaèp taê. Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.	Then the righteous will shine forth like the sun in the Kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Beèe ce Nyúè be fa ñgá' ce e caèa ñger neè woweèe, yu beèe ce a ku ce geèe ba buu bbebep ce yaèp nyor ce koèñ, a ker ce kani efa ryu'nïì naè. Ñgaâa ryá'nïì ce a yu ñgaâa mnde' naè a ke wáp yuu ka'. Woweèe a teèe btu, a ke' ce wáp aè rcáp byú' ce vi túr ñger a caa woweèe naè ka'.	but chiefly those who walk after the flesh in the lust of defilement, and despise authority. Daring, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignitaries;
Njeèndoñ aè laa embe múè mmbaè' ca enáê, “Cena yu muu waè. A ye ñwáè ce máè m ce. Ce yu' neè yuu ce e ce laèa.”	"A voice came out of the cloud, saying, ""This is my beloved Son. Listen to him!"""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yáá ye, a laa enáê, “Masaè, Masaè, seèe aè kwe.” E lá' efa mmirloè, a waa fu' ba rdip, fu' anaè yi tetïì, rdip li táá nyañ, ñgoèñ yi ba seè'ni neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	"They came to him, and awoke him, saying, ""Master, master, we are dying!"" He awoke, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it was calm."
AÈde' yuu bebep yi ba' aè rla' anaè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ba ñwáè bsaèrbuu, káè ñwáè mnde' áè, aède' e niñ aè rla' anaè ka'. Beèe ce a be niñ aè rla' anaè ku ba ba beèe ce a m sañ map mlii mbe ñwaâ' ryoèñ muu njeèe.	There will in no way enter into it anything profane, or one who causes an abomination or a lie, but only those who are written in the Lamb's book of life.
Seèe gee ñgeèe aèmboè beèe ce a ce cu ba aè rraa. Seèe fa ce duè mñkaâ' bghaa, káè ce no buu tá vi ce koo seèe ka'. Seèe borni bsaèkïì ba mká'ni. Seèe borni mlap ba ñko'ndoñ.	Let us walk properly, as in the day; not in reveling and drunkenness, not in sexual promiscuity and lustful acts, and not in strife and jealousy.
Muu nsuènsuè ca aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa wáp ka', m rïìñ máná weèe ce roèo Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt ce a mú taa ye mbe kïìntaa naè. E yu mbena ka'. E fúú efa rkwe. Yá neè, a mbe dïì' a mú lá ye na.	"He said to them, ""Don't be amazed. You seek Jesus, the Nazarene, who has been crucified. He has risen. He is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him!"
Nyʉ̀ à m boo buu wɛɛwɛ embe ŋgòŋ na.	God created everything in this world.
Mbèŋ à koo Fàakɛ a borsi ye sê.	The rain has caught Fake and has soaked her so much.
Dïì' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ce e m ce beè' aè m ba dïì' ce a sañ enáê, “AÈmboè njeèe ce a ke duè aègho aè rsáá, káè muu njeèe ce a ke koo mnyoâr efa gho e ce war ka' naè, e m múè' yi cuèu ka'.	"Now the passage of the Scripture which he was reading was this, ""He was led as a sheep to the slaughter. As a lamb before his shearer is silent, so he doesn't open his mouth."
Mɛ̀ sùʼsi ma mkùu.	I have washed my feet.
Mnoâñ btaar ba bá' vi ka' caèa, Nyúè aè yoñseè mbenduè beèe a mmbaa anaè, a fa woweèe ryoèñ, woweèe a natïì a táá mbekïì. Beèe ce a m yá woweèe a wáp seê.	After the three and a half days, the breath of life from God entered into them, and they stood on their feet. Great fear fell on those who saw them.
Rbì rli kwar e.	The kola nut has reduced its water content.
E cwaʼ ye nè rkòŋ.	He has pierced him with a spear.
Ñwáè moè' ye ye aè ker laa enáê, “Tataê, m be duè a wáâ mbuèu. Kuè ma'shi tá m du daèasi beèe embe máâ ndaèp wáá.”	"Another also said, ""I want to follow you, Lord, but first allow me to say good-bye to those who are at my house."""
E m geèe buu bbáèá, a gee mor yi suu embe buèu foñ, beèe wááwá a yá.	He performs great signs, even making fire come down out of the sky to the earth in the sight of people.
Ŋwɛɛ Nye Bkwâa [ŋwɛ̄ː njē bkwâː] cn 7.	month of July.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “A sañ mbe ñwaâ' mncir ená ká? Wá ke beè' mbo ená ká?”	"He said to him, ""What is written in the law? How do you read it?"""
Yuu ce wɛ̀ làa anà zhi raa kaʼ.	What you have said is not clear.
Woweèe a yop yáá, a nati a ce duè mbe rtuèu Oleèf.	When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Njáèá buu bbebep ca vi geèe Nyúè ce ko'si rshentee neè beèe.	for which things' sake the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
Nlaâa Tata Nyúè yi cu yi aè nfeè' sïìp.” Nlaèa anaè yu Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce a feè'shi neè weèe naè.	"but the Lord's word endures forever."" This is the word of Good News which was preached to you."
Ñgeèe beèe ce a yu yap ba beâe bbebep, a ce bo'shi ená a rïìñ Nyúè se naè, yi be bep caèa ñger. Woweèe a be keè ce bo' beèe, ce bo' wap btu foñ.	But evil men and impostors will grow worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
M be keèr suñ buu weèe seèe weèe goèr ka' njobeè' ñwáè ce e ce sa' ñgoèñ ca ce vúè. E túr ñger mbe máâ nduè ka'.	I will no more speak much with you, for the prince of the world comes, and he has nothing in me.
tá ñwáè ce e ce faè' neè Nyúè bo túr buu wááwá, ghááte aè rgeèe mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ.	that the man of God may be complete, thoroughly equipped for every good work.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Abraèham aè ba ma nleeñwáè, ka' yi m ba wa'a, yïì ñgúè aè m loè yaa, a ba aèmboè mkaèñsïì embe buèu, a ker ba foñ aèmboè nsaruñ yïû aèwaâa roè ce aède' ñwáè be' ka' naè.	Therefore as many as the stars of the sky in multitude, and as innumerable as the sand which is by the sea shore, were fathered by one man, and him as good as dead.
Ñwáè aè suñ máè ená Jus a cu mncúè ená a bo tá' ye, koo yú, máè laa máná a lor ye du aègho cárcár fa neè wáè. Máè ker laa foñ neè beèe ce a m ce koèñ aè rsa' mnsa' a Pol naè ená woweèe a vú njep wáâ tïìi, suñ yuu ce e geèe.”	"When I was told that the Jews lay in wait for the man, I sent him to you immediately, charging his accusers also to bring their accusations against him before you. Farewell."""
Bfúr waê, m ce loo máná Tata Jisoès túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ. Yi yu wa'a.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brothers. Amen.
Baná beèe Isráèl wááwá a rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená Jisoès ce woweèe a m taa mbe kïìntaa naè yu ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m geèe e ba Tataê, a ker ba Kraâis anaè.”	Let all the house of Israel therefore know certainly that God has made him both Lord and Christ, this Jesus whom you crucified.
Fa mɛ̀ ŋwàʼ ca.	Give me this book.
Jisoès aè duê, a ka' baè', a ma'shi ená ñwáè moè' niñ mbe ndaèp a ye caa efa Pitaè ba Joân ba Jáêms, ker ba tar muu ba ma muu ka'.	When he came to the house, he didn't allow anyone to enter in, except Peter, John, James, the father of the child, and her mother.
Mboè weèe rïìñ weená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce a m baèptir seèe aè rlii Jisoès naè, seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè kweñgeèr aèbee a?	Or don't you know that all we who were baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death?
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè mú yá aèmboè Sataèn aè gweè embe buèu aèmboè mbeèñ aè baèp wa'a.	"He said to them, ""I saw Satan having fallen like lightning from heaven."
Weâe ce duè, weèe ce fe'shi weená kúú Nyúè embe buèu yi yu aètútú.	As you go, preach, saying, 'The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!'
Máè m caèa beèe magoèr seê, efa múè yaè waè', aè njáèá njïì ce máè m ce geèe ndeèe Juês. Máè m túr ntee luèulu njep ndeèe wa btarkú seê.	I advanced in the Jews' religion beyond many of my own age among my countrymen, being more exceedingly zealous for the traditions of my fathers.
Ŋwàʼ Nyʉ̀ zhi suŋ buu bbòŋboŋ.	The Bible tells about a lot of good things.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè beèesi yáánïì. Geèe wa'a tá aè bo cu nfeseè.”	"He said to him, ""You have answered correctly. Do this, and you will live."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, njeèndoñ Nyúè aè gee ñgoèñ yi ci'tïì, aè ka' ba seè'ni, Nyúè aè ye leè' ená e be cïì' ñgoèñ ca seè'ni nfeè' moè'sir caè'caè', keèr cïì' rbuu foñ.	"whose voice shook the earth then, but now he has promised, saying, ""Yet once more I will shake not only the earth, but also the heavens."""
A be vúè neè ku' bkuè' enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá láè aè rla' anaè.	and they shall bring the glory and the honor of the nations into it so that they may enter.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Pailáèt aè fúú njepmbeè a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè koo ñwáè ca a vú aègho ená e faèa ká?”	"Pilate therefore went out to them, and said, ""What accusation do you bring against this man?"""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “A máè ce máâ ke geèe beèe a ce fúú efa rkwe, a ker ba ñwáè ce e ke fa ryoèñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè, ka' ñgaèñ aè ka' kwe, e be cu nfeseè.	"Jesus said to her, ""I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me will still live, even if he dies."
Ŋkar òo à vʉ̀ tǎa, a yɛ wɛ̀ kaʼ.	Your friend came in here and did not see you.
Kraâis aè m vúè, rfaè' efa mncir li mïî, tá ñwáè wááwá ce e byemi neè ye bo ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	For Christ is the fulfillment of the law for righteousness to everyone who believes.
Woweèe a ka' cu tá a bo ye byee, e lor bráêd, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi a fa neè woweèe.	It happened, that when he had sat down at the table with them, he took the bread and gave thanks. Breaking it, he gave to them.
E ka' laèa wa', a ghashi ye aè rkoo maè', a naa mbekïì. E ka' naèti táá mbekïì, mi mkuèu mi tap, vi byuèñ nyor enje mlir mkuèu vi tap.	He took him by the right hand, and raised him up. Immediately his feet and his ankle bones received strength.
Ka' seè'ni na, máè rïìñ máná Nyúè be fa yuu ce wáè ka' bipshi neè ye.”	"Even now I know that, whatever you ask of God, God will give you."""
Weèe wááwá yu boo Nyúè njobeè' weèe aè byemi neè Jisos Kraêis.	For you are all children of God, through faith in Christ Jesus.
A m súèñ a niñ aègho mbe múè yïû ñgoèr, a fyáá bkúè a kur keñ ñgoèr aègho faè dïì' e sa'ñger ka'. Woweèe a ka' ce wáp ená keñ be baè' Sitïì, niñ njep múè nsaruñ táá, woweèe a suusïì ma co' ce keñ aè m ce táá aègho naè njep múè roè tá keñ bo táá, keñ aè ku ce duè neè yi bo.	After they had hoisted it up, they used cables to help reinforce the ship. Fearing that they would run aground on the Syrtis sand bars, they lowered the sea anchor, and so were driven along.
Yuu ce weèr aè yá a ker yu', weèr ce suñ weèe foñ tá seèe bo ba aèbee. Yu ba seèe Taèr ba Muu yïû Jisos Kraâis weèe, ce seèe yu aèbee.	that which we have seen and heard we declare to you, that you also may have fellowship with us. Yes, and our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son, Jesus Christ.
Ŋgàa wɛɛ a m ce kʉti efa wɛɛ, a ce màʼ ntɛ̀ɛ.	As the hunters were returning from a hunt they were doing mock hunting.
Woweèe a ka' cu mbe tábuèr ce ye byee, Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená moè' efa weèe be fyeèni máè, moè' ce e ce ye byee weèr ye.”	"As they sat and were eating, Jesus said, ""Most certainly I tell you, one of you will betray me--he who eats with me."""
Beèe Farïìsi mo' ce a m ba aèfo a yu' blaèa ca, a m bipshi neè ye enáê, “Baná weèr aè feèp foñ a?”	"Those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and said to him, ""Are we also blind?"""
Cor nsïìp ker ba beèe wááwá ce a m yu' buu ce vi m koni na a m wáp seê.	Great fear came on the whole assembly, and on all who heard these things.
Cáè' ce a m teni dïì' mo' embe Ndaèp Nyúè aègho yi m saèti, ká' embe tuè du a ba' njep mbuèu.	The veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom.
Judaès ce e m ba aè rfyeèni ye naè, aè laa enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, waè' a máè a?” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ laèa yo cuèu.”	"Judas, who betrayed him, answered, ""It isn't me, is it, Rabbi?"" He said to him, ""You said it."""
E bàŋsi cùu nè mgʉr.	He has smeared his mouth with oil.
E ka' toèo woweèe, woweèe a cáp Nyúè ce e túr ñger mbenduè mñgá' ca wááwá. Woweèe a m kani efa rkupse yap ntee, kuè'si Nyúè.	People were scorched with great heat, and people blasphemed the name of God who has the power over these plagues. They didn't repent and give him glory.
Nfeè' aè m káè' a ce caèa, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a vúê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Seèe yu aè njïìsaèp efa mla', nyúè aè ce coo.	"When it was late in the day, his disciples came to him, and said, ""This place is deserted, and it is late in the day."
Ñwáè ce e túr Muu Nyúè aè koni ryoèñ, ñwáè ce e túr Muu Nyúè ka', aè koni ryoèñ ka'.	He who has the Son has the life. He who doesn't have God's Son doesn't have the life.
tá beèe a bo yu'ni neè Muu yïì aèmboè a ke yu'ni neè ye foñ naè. Ñwáè aè ka' tá yu'ni neè muu ka', baná aède' ñgaèñ yu'nïì neè Taèr ce e m tuu Muu anaè ka'.	that all may honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. He who doesn't honor the Son doesn't honor the Father who sent him.
a waa enáê, “Beèe Isráèl, jaè' neè weèr! Ñwáè ca a ñwáè ce e ce jáèr ce yá'ni beèe wááwá ená yïìseèe beèe ba viseèe mncir ker ba yïìseèe Ndap Nyúè ca yu yuu ka'. E ker lor beèe enje jáá foñ a niñ aègho mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a bepsi dïû' rara ca yi ba jaèpri.”	"crying out, ""Men of Israel, help! This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place. Moreover, he also brought Greeks into the temple, and has defiled this holy place!"""
A ka' suñ, beèe wááwá aè rla' anaè a fúú, a du aè ryá Jisoès, a ka' yá ye, a bu' mmbo neè ye ená e lo efa yap ñgoèñ.	Behold, all the city came out to meet Jesus. When they saw him, they begged that he would depart from their borders.
Tata Nyúè be fa weèe ñger tá weèe táá tatap baè' aèlúèsimbuèu faè dïì' weèe bo keè gweè mnsa' aè noèñ ce Jisos Kraâis aè vúè ka'.	who will also confirm you until the end, blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Baná mú mnsa' vi ba a weâe mú, weèe du aègho mbe koêr, fa neè beèe ce cor e ke loèr aè yuu ka', ená a sa' neè weèe njoká?	If then, you have to judge things pertaining to this life, do you set them to judge who are of no account in the assembly?
Maataè aè ka' laèa wa'a, a du a ká' nfúr yïû Máèári a cúúni neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì aè vúè a ce ká' wáè.”	"When she had said this, she went away, and called Mary, her sister, secretly, saying, ""The Teacher is here, and is calling you."""
Mɛ̀ sàr nè wɛ̀ àmbò a ke gèe ŋwàʼ.	I explained to you how a book is made.
Judaès aè ma' mbaèa anaè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a fúú, a du a kárnïî.	He threw down the pieces of silver in the sanctuary, and departed. He went away and hanged himself.
Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m tuusi ye neè moè' efa woweèe ka'. E m tuusi ye ba neè ñgwañkúñwáè moè' ce e m ba aè rla' Sáráfaèr aè ñgoâñ Sidoèn.	Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, to a woman who was a widow.
Yuu ce yi m koni weèe, ku ba yuu ce yi m koni ñgaâa cor ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, ce a yu beèe Jisos Kraêis. Yeè beèe a m fa weèe ñgá' aèmboè Jus a m fa woweèe ñgá' foñ naè.	For you, brothers, became imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judea in Christ Jesus; for you also suffered the same things from your own countrymen, even as they did from the Jews;
Weèe ce weèe yu bkwaèa, yu'ni neè neè wee mmasaè enjep ñgoèñ na; wáp woweèe. Yu'ni neè neè woweèe neè ntee e mo'sir aèmboè weèe ce yu'ni neè Kraâis naè.	Servants, be obedient to those who according to the flesh are your masters, with fear and trembling, in singleness of your heart, as to Christ;
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Tïìbárïìyaès aè m cu mbe kúú, a sa' aè bfeè' ncoèp-ta-aè- rrúèú, Nyúè aè laa neè Joân muu Saèkaèriyaè aè ntee rïìñ. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Pontos Pailáèt aè ba govanoâ aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè. Hároèd aè ce sa' ñgoâñ Galeèleê, Felep ce e m ba nfúr yïì, aè ce sa' ñgoâñ Ituraè ba ñgoâñ Taèkonitïìs, Lesanaès aè ce sa' ñgoâñ Abiláèn.	Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region of Ituraea and Trachonitis, and Lysanias tetrarch of Abilene,
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, beèe mo' aè to' Greâs a ba aè múè beèe ce a m ce du aè rgeèe rloo aè ñkaè' anaè.	Now there were certain Greeks among those that went up to worship at the feast.
AÈ ka' ba neètú' moè', Tata aè laa neè Pol aè rlo enáê, “Fa wáp ka', kuè ce fe'shi blaâa Nyúè, ke' borni aè nfeè' moè' ka',	"The Lord said to Paul in the night by a vision, ""Don't be afraid, but speak and don't be silent;"
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce yu' yuu ce boo ca a ce yoèp a?” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “ÁÈno, aèmboè weèe aè be be' dïì' mo' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ce yi ce laèa enáê, ‘Weèe aè yá'ni bghaèrbeèe, ba boo ce a bii nyoñ mmbee, woweèe a ce kuè'si Nyúè boèñboñ se’ naè a?”	"and said to him, ""Do you hear what these are saying?"" Jesus said to them, ""Yes. Did you never read, 'Out of the mouth of babes and nursing babies you have perfected praise?'"""
E m káè' a ce cáp Nyúè, a laa buu bbebep a kuu rlii Nyúè ker ba faèdïì' Nyúè ce cu, ba beèe embe buèu wááwá.	He opened his mouth for blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his dwelling, those who dwell in heaven.
Muu ca yu cɛcɛr sê.	This child is very smart.
E m ker laa enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe be yá aèmboè rbuu li be múè'ti tá bcïìndap Nyúè a ce ko' ce suèu mbenduè Muu Ñwáè.”	"He said to him, ""Most certainly, I tell you, hereafter you will see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of Man."""
Baná aè gee yuu ce weèr be suñ wáè. Weèr túr beèe moè' beèe ñkyeèe ce a ye leè' neè Nyúè.	Therefore do what we tell you. We have four men who have taken a vow.
M ce lu'shi njobeè' Stáfánaès, Foètunatoès ba AÈkaikoès a vúè a yá máè aèfa. M ce lu'shi njobeè' máè yá woweèe, yi ba aèmboè máè yá lá ba weèe wááwá wa'a.	I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas, Fortunatus, and Achaicus; for that which was lacking on your part, they supplied.
moè' efa weèe ka' yá ye, laa neè ye enáê, “Duè neè rfúteè-ñwáè du ma' bcáè' ce yoè nyor bo luèu, yeñger boèñboñ,” e laèa wa'a ke' fa ye buu ce e buu na ka', e ja' ye a njáâá ká?	"and one of you tells them, ""Go in peace, be warmed and filled;"" and yet you didn't give them the things the body needs, what good is it?"
Baná weèe fa wee btu mbe mmbo Nyúè. Weèe kani Sataèn tá e cañ weèe.	Be subject therefore to God. But resist the devil, and he will flee from you.
E beesïì neè woweèe enáê, ‘Yuu ca aè geèe yaè ñwáè bbaèa moè'.’ Ñgaâa mfaè' a laa neè ye enáê, ‘AÈ ce koèñ wáná weèr du co'ni ñke' anaè a?’	He said to them, 'An enemy has done this.' The servants asked him, 'Do you want us to go and gather them up?'
Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè ka' tá baè ba ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep ka', weèr aè ba koo ye vúè aègho fa neè wáè ka'.”	"They answered him, ""If this man weren't an evildoer, we wouldn't have delivered him up to you."""
Jisoès aè ka' yá lap rbyemïì, a laa neè ñwáè ce mbeèp nyor aè m kwe naè enáê, “Muu waè, máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep.”	"Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, ""Son, your sins are forgiven you."""
Weèr aè láè ntee njep Nyúè aèmboè ñwáè ce e m laèa mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Máè m byemi a ka' laêa.” Baná wer weèr foñ aè byemi a ka' laêa.	"But having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, ""I believed, and therefore I spoke."" We also believe, and therefore also we speak;"
Nsuñ mboèñmboñ ca yu nsuñ ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè beèe. E m laèa, ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ce yi yu rara.	which he promised before through his prophets in the holy Scriptures,
a laa enáê, “M ce laèa neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe aè ka' tá kupse, ba aèmboè boo bká' ka', aède' weèe niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka'.	"and said, ""Most certainly I tell you, unless you turn, and become as little children, you will in no way enter into the Kingdom of Heaven."
Baná weèe du suñ ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ba Pitaè ená e duè aè ñgoâñ Galeèle entombïì neè weèe. Weèe be yá ye aèfo aèmboè e m suñ weèe naè.”	"But go, tell his disciples and Peter, 'He goes before you into Galilee. There you will see him, as he said to you.'"""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Mbuèu moè' yu aègho neè woweèe aè rduè ka'. Fa neè woweèe yuu tá a ye.”	"But Jesus said to them, ""They don't need to go away. You give them something to eat."""
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yá wa'a, a laa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a ce geèe yuu ce ncir yi byemi ená a gee nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè ka'.”	"But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, ""Behold, your disciples do what is not lawful to do on the Sabbath."""
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè natïì mbekïì a bipshi neè Jisoès enáê, “AÈ túr yuu aè rbeèesi kuu yuu ce beèe ca a ce laèa kuu wáè na ka' a?”	"The high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus, ""Have you no answer? What is it which these testify against you?"""
Nyúè aè m ker laa laèa, yi ba ená rbuu ba nshe ce seèe ce yá na a be kuè cu duè baè' aè noèñ ce mor yi be toèo tá vi she dúèdúè. Buu ca be kuè cu duè baè' aè noèñ ce Nyúè be sa' beèe wááwá, geèe tá beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè ye ka' a kwe bú aè cicïì.	But the heavens that now are, and the earth, by the same word have been stored up for fire, being reserved against the day of judgment and destruction of ungodly men.
Baná woweèe a ker ba a baa ka'. A yu ba ñwáè moè'sir. Baná yuu ce Nyúè aè tarshi, ñwáè moè' fa gaèpse ka'.”	"So that they are no more two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, don't let man tear apart."""
E ka' fúú efa rkwe a duñshi yïì nyor neè Sáfaès, a ker lo a duñshi yïì nyor neè yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
Ñwáè ce e m suèu anaè ku ba ye ce e m ko' mbekïì a caa rbuu tá e bo ba aè bdïì' wááwá, tá buu wááwá ghááte aèmboè vi ba ba.	He who descended is the one who also ascended far above all the heavens, that he might fill all things.
Baná aè koñ Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè neè yo ntee-ñwáè, ba neè lo ryoèñ-ñwáè, ker ba neè wo bfee-ñwáè wááwá, ker ba neè yo ñger wááwá.’	you shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul, and with all your mind, and with all your strength.' This is the first commandment.
Lisò rkòŋ rli cɛp kaʼ.	Our spear is not sharp.
Geewa'a e m ku ce fyá' aè ryá ñwáè ce e joèo ye anaè.	He looked around to see her who had done this thing.
Buu ca aè ka' mïì wáá, Jisoès aè ká' a ce karkar aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. E m koèñ aè rduè aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ka' njobeè' Jus a m ce koèñ aè ryú ye.	After these things, Jesus was walking in Galilee, for he wouldn't walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
Yi ka' ba wa'a baná seèe cu rcu ce mini. Njáèá buu bbebep aèmboè bcena vi fa ba a seâe mú ka'. Ñwáè fa túr mkwaè'shïû mbebep neè nfúr yïì ka'. Ñwáè fa geèe bsaèrbuu ka'.	Therefore let us keep the feast, not with old yeast, neither with the yeast of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená beèe mo' a yu aè múè beèe ce a tááte mbena ce rkwe li be joèo woweèe ka', tá woweèe a ku cu caar, yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e ce vúè neè yi kúú-ñwáè.”	"Most certainly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Son of Man coming in his Kingdom."""
Rïìñ neè neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ce saèki, ba ñwáè ce e ce ká'ni, ker ba ñwáè ce e túr yuu, yi gháá ye ka', ce e loèr buu ca aèmboè yïì Nyúè wa'a, aède' e konïì buu bboèñboñ ce beèe ce a túr dïì' mbe dïû' kúú Jisos Kraâis ba Nyúè a koni naè ka'.	Know this for sure, that no sexually immoral person, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and God.
Mŋkaŋka bvi bùr lùuni sê.	Many butterflies have hatched this year.
AÈ m ba eluâuñgoèñ, Nyúè aè laa neè viseèe bta nfeè' aèñgoo aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá. E m laèa njïì enjep beèe ce a m ce cep yi ntuu neè beèe.	God, having in the past spoken to the fathers through the prophets at many times and in various ways,
Ku' beèe a vúê, a yá Pailáèt a laa neè ye ená e fúr ñwáè shañ moè' embe shañ aèmboè e ke geèe aè nfeè' ñkaè' ca naè.	The multitude, crying aloud, began to ask him to do as he always did for them.
Rbyemïì li m geèe Aisïìk aè ghonïì Jakoèp ba Ásoè, a suñ woweèe aèmboè bghoènïì ce woweèe a be loè koni.	By faith, Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau, even concerning things to come.
Woweèe a ka' yu', a yá bleebeèe a woweèe a cuteè a fa ntañ, a lor ku' mbaèa a fa neè bsoogáè caè,	When they were assembled with the elders, and had taken counsel, they gave a large amount of silver to the soldiers,
Ka' weèe ce laèa wa'a, weèe rïìñ ye ka'. Máè rïìñ ye. M ka' ba laa máná máè rïìñ ye ka', máè ba ba ñwáè mnde' aèmboè weèe. Máè rïìñ ye, a ce geèe yuu ce e ce laèa.	You have not known him, but I know him. If I said, 'I don't know him,' I would be like you, a liar. But I know him, and keep his word.
Ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu moè' ce aè m ba Andruè ce e m ba nfúr Saimún Pitaè aè laa neè Jisoès enáê,	One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, said to him,
Jisòs be kèe bʉ̀ sèe à nòŋ elʉ̀simbùu.	Jesus shall surprise us on the last day.
Baná a be yu' yuu ce weèe aè laèa neètú' ba aè mmir wañ, suñ yïì ce weèe aè cete keèñ a cúúni ñwáè mbaè tuè' ba aè btu mndap.	Therefore whatever you have said in the darkness will be heard in the light. What you have spoken in the ear in the inner rooms will be proclaimed on the housetops.
A m koo Pitaè ba Joân a li' mbe ndaèp, a lá woweèe mbo caar túè' aè raa, njobeè' nyúè aè m coo.	They laid hands on them, and put them in custody until the next day, for it was now evening.
Loèr neè beèe ca tá weèe woweèe du geèe yuu ce ncir yi ce laèa ená ñwáè gee tá e bo ba nrara aè bsii Nyúè. Fa woweèe mbaèa tá woweèe a bo koo btu. Wáè ka' gee wa'a, tá ñwáè wááwá bo rïìñ ená buu ce beèe a suñ aèmboè wáè naè, vi yu mini ka', rïìñ seè'ni ená wá wáè foñ ce láè mncir Musïìs.	Take them, and purify yourself with them, and pay their expenses for them, that they may shave their heads. Then all will know that there is no truth in the things that they have been informed about you, but that you yourself also walk keeping the law.
Seèe rïìñ seená Nyúè e ke geèe yáánïì aè nfeè' ce e ce sa' beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca.	We know that the judgment of God is according to truth against those who practice such things.
Baná weèe fa wáp ka'. Weèe luèu ntaa aè bsii Nyúè a caa bbe' aèñgoo.	Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows.
Máè caèasi nfeè' ka', a tuu beèe ená a vú ká' wáè. Wáè geèe yuu boèñboñ seê, a vúê. Weèr yu mbena seè'ni aè bsii Nyúè, tá weèr bo yu' yuu ce Tata aè laèa neè wáè ená aè laa neè weèr.”	"Therefore I sent to you at once, and it was good of you to come. Now therefore we are all here present in the sight of God to hear all things that have been commanded you by God."""
E ka' yúshi beâe aè bto' saèamba ce vi m ba aè ñgoâñ Kánaèn, a fa ñgoèñ anaè aè bti' neè yïì beèe,	When he had destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land for an inheritance, for about four hundred fifty years.
Bfúr waê, yuu ce m ce laèa aèlúèsimbuèu du kuu buu ce máè suñ na yi yu ba ená weèe ka' niñ coêr, ñwáè wááwá tami nyor aè rgeèe yuu ce Nyúè aè fa ye bfee aè rgeèe. Ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè ryoèp yáá, e yoêp, ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè ryá'ni beèe blaâa Nyúè, e yá'nïì, ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè rsuñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe vi ba brara neè ye, e suêñ, ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè rlaèa neè beèe aè njáèá li ce e m be yá'ni ka', e laêa, ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè rbeèesi blaèa ce ñwáè ca aè laèa aè li anaè, e beesïî. Seèe gee buu ca wááwá ba aè njáèá njïì ce aède' buu anaè ja' ñgaâa coêr.	What is it then, brothers? When you come together, each one of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a revelation, has another language, has an interpretation. Let all things be done to build each other up.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi mbenduè nyúè ce e ke sañ na. E ka' cuè', Taâr Nyúè aè ma'shïì, ñgá' anaè aè she aèmboè mor wa'a, a too beèe.	The fourth poured out his bowl on the sun, and it was given to him to scorch men with fire.
Waè' beèe ce a yu ñgaâa mboâñtu ca ku ba ba beèe ce a geèe búè a? Beèe ce a geèe búè ka' a be ba ñgaâa mboâñtu foñ. Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè Abraèhaêm. To seèe ce laèa seená Nyúè aè m loèr Abraèham aè ñwáâ nyáánïì njo' li rbyemïì.	Is this blessing then pronounced on the circumcised, or on the uncircumcised also? For we say that faith was accounted to Abraham for righteousness.
Yi ka' ba wa'a weèe aè ku bii neè naèa-tu-ñwáè, a ce kwaè' ená aède' weèe gee buu wááwá a weâe ñger. Njáèá naèa-tu anaè boèñ ka'.	But now you glory in your boasting. All such boasting is evil.
Yaa nfaakòŋ zhi goote e, mɛ̀ nashì.	My spear handle was bent, and I have straightened it.
Pailáèt aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè ye du sa' ye aèmboè ye ncir yi yu.” Woweèe a laa enáê, “Weèr túr ñger aè rsa' ñwáè yú ka'.”	"Pilate therefore said to them, ""Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law."" Therefore the Jews said to him, ""It is not lawful for us to put anyone to death,"""
Mɛ ke dù ntaa kù Bàmɛndà kaʼ.	I donʼt attend Bamenda market.
baná ñgaèñ be koni ku' buu se aè nfeè' e seè'ni na, keèr koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè aè nfeè' ce e bii ka' vúè.”	"who will not receive many times more in this time, and in the world to come, eternal life."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu, ma'shi tá bgúâú beèe a tuñ waêp bgúâú beèe.”	"But Jesus said to him, ""Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead."""
Beèe Nyúè ce aèfa wááwá a caè'ni weèe, lañlañ beèe ce a ce faè' mbe ndaèp Sisaè.	All the saints greet you, especially those who are of Caesar's household.
Woweèe a túr aè ce táá njep buu ce vi kuèu rbyemïì ce yu buu ce vi caèa bfee ñwáè naè neè ntee rara.	holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè ñwáè Farïìsi anaè ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir enáê, “Ncir yi byemi ená seèe gee tá ñwáè yañ ke'se nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè káè yi byemi ka'?”	"Jesus, answering, spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, ""Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath?"""
E tor bo enɛ e bo koo mbàa.	He has extended his hand in order to take the money.
E ke ba aè nfeè' ce a ce tuñ ñwáè, e túr ba njáèá nyor ce seèe túr na. E ba aè nfeè' ce e fúú efa rkwe e túr ba nyor ce aè yú'. Nyor moè' ka' ba ce e yu nyor ce seèe túr na, baná nyor moè' ku ba ce e yu nyor ce aè yú'.	It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body and there is also a spiritual body.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá aèmboè e ce jáèr mbenduè rdip, woweèe a wáp seê, a laa enáê, “Yu nyir”, a ka' laèa wa'a, a waa njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp.	"When the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, ""It's a ghost!"" and they cried out for fear."
Woweèe a ka' ce loo neè Tataê, ce jïì mdip ce geèe rloo, Yú' Rara yi laa enáê, “Fúr neè Baènabaès ba Sol efa weâe mú, tá a bo geèe rfaè' ce máè fúr woweèe ená a geêe.”	"As they served the Lord and fasted, the Holy Spirit said, ""Separate Barnabas and Saul for me, for the work to which I have called them."""
E ka' keèr tuu moè', woweèe a báásïì ye, a fúr embe múè nsuu a ma'.	He sent yet a third, and they also wounded him, and threw him out.
Wáè ba cu'ni máè mgúr mbe tuè ka', e cu'nïì mgúr ce mi ce rúèú boèñboñ se aè ma mkuèu.	You didn't anoint my head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with ointment.
A ka' koo woweèe duè aègho aè to' Babiloèn, Jáèkonaèr aè bi Shálatáèr, Shálatáèr aè bi Sáèrobabáèr,	After the exile to Babylon, Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel. Shealtiel became the father of Zerubbabel.
Abraèham aè m cu aè btaèp anaè a ce keè' nfeè' ce e be keè ce cu ba mbe ndaèp aè rla' ce aè m kupshi ba Nyúè a ba'rïî.	For he looked for the city which has the foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
E laa enáê, “Mncir vïû fá?” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Fa yú ka', fa koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè' ka', fa yáèá ka', fa táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ ka',	"He said to him, ""Which ones?"" Jesus said, ""'You shall not murder.' 'You shall not commit adultery.' 'You shall not steal.' 'You shall not offer false testimony.'"
M be lò dù ntaa.	I shall go to the market.
E m niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ká' a ce juèu beèe ce a m ce fyeèni buu mbo,	He entered into the temple, and began to drive out those who bought and sold in it,
Yïì ta ba yïì ma a beesïì a laa enáê, “Weèr rïìñ ená e yu muu weèr. Weèr aè m bi ye e ku ba nfeèp.	"His parents answered them, ""We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind;"
Pol aè ca'nïì woweèe, a suñ woweèe buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè geèe neè beèe enje jáá njo' rfaè' ce e m geèe fa waâp mú.	When he had greeted them, he reported one by one the things which God had worked among the Gentiles through his ministry.
Beèe ce a m táá aègee Pol, a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce cáp tu ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì yïû Nyúè a?”	"Those who stood by said, ""Do you malign God's high priest?"""
Mbuèu ce Nyúè aè m koosimnse neè máè aè m ba tá Jisos Kraâis bo duèñshi beèe ená e yu ñwáè ce aède' e kur ntee seê. E m geèe wa'a tá beèe a bo yá aèmboè e kur ntee neè máè ce m yu ñkúú efa múè ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, tá m bo ba rduèñshïì neè beèe ce a be byemi neè ye, koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	However, for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might display all his patience, for an example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life.
Abraèham aè m ku lá mi mmir mbenduè Nyúè, a byemi yuu ce e m kaè', ka' yi m ce yááti ená yuu ce Abraèham aè m láè mmir mbenduè mo naè yi be geeti ka' wa'a. Yi ka' ba wa'a, Abraèham aè lo a ba taèr neè bto' magoèr. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaè' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Yo ñgúè be ba goèr aèmboè mkaèñsïì wa'a.”	"Who in hope believed against hope, to the end that he might become a father of many nations, according to that which had been spoken, ""So will your seed be."""
Baná weèr ce tuu nfúr weèr moè' foñ ená e du a woweèe. Nfúr ca yu ñwáè ce weèr aè fyá' ye nfeè' aèñgoo seê, a yá ená e túr ntee aè rgeèe rfaè' Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá. E túr ntee aè rjaè' weèe seè'ni na seê, njobeè' e túr ntee njep weèe goèr seê.	We have sent with them our brother, whom we have many times proved earnest in many things, but now much more earnest, by reason of the great confidence which he has in you.
E tùusi baa.	He has caused the fufu to be watery.
Weèr aè m ce roèo ená beèe a ku'si weèr ka', ka' weèe áè, káè beèe mo' áè, weèr aè m ce roèo wa' ka'.	nor seeking glory from men (neither from you nor from others), when we might have claimed authority as apostles of Christ.
Fa byemi ka' njobeè' beèe ce a caèa beèe mkyeèe a be tá' ye aè nduunjïì. Woweèe a ye leè' ená a ka' tá yú Pol ka', a ye yuu ka', ker no yuu ka'. Woweèe a tami nyor seè'ni a ce keè' ená aè byemi gee yuu ce woweèe a be laèa.”	"Therefore don't yield to them, for more than forty men lie in wait for him, who have bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor to drink until they have killed him. Now they are ready, looking for the promise from you."""
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “AÈde' beèe ce a duè aè ñkaâ' bguèu, a ba aè nduu-guèu weèe ker ce koosimnse aè njáâá ká? Geewa'a, nfeè' moè' be ba ce a be koo nduu- guèu ese woweèe, tá woweèe a ka' koosimnse aè nfeè' anaè.	"Jesus said to them, ""Can the friends of the bridegroom mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast."
Pol aè m niñ mbe ndaèp rloo, a laa neè beèe neè ñger-ñwáè aè mñwáá btaar, a ce naèshi woweèe buu aèmboè Jisoès tá woweèe a bo rïìñ njáèá njïì ce Nyúè ce sa' aèmboè ñkúú.	He entered into the synagogue, and spoke boldly for a period of three months, reasoning and persuading about the things concerning the Kingdom of God.
Buu ce a sañ mbe ñwaâ' mncir ba mbe mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè vi m túr ñger a ba' mbe nfeè' yïì Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe. Ká' ese aè nfeè' anaè a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè, ñwáè wááwá aè ce gheèter aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè anaè aè ñger.	The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the Good News of the Kingdom of God is preached, and everyone is forcing his way into it.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná ñwáè ce e ka' fa weèe ndoñ mdip njobeè' weèe yu beèe Kraêis, aède' e bá vi blaè' ka'.”	For whoever will give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because you are Christ's, most certainly I tell you, he will in no way lose his reward.
Blaè' efa buu bbebep yu rkwe, rfa ce Nyúè ce fa neè beèe aè cicïì aè ba ryoèñ ce nfeseè ce seèe aè koni njobeè' seèe yu aèbee seèe Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe.	For the wages of sin is death, but the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, ‘Fa moèoshi Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè ka'.’ ”	"Jesus answering, said to him, ""It has been said, 'You shall not tempt the Lord your God.'"""
Weèr túr ñger aè rgeèe yuu mo' neè yer tu ka'. Yer ñger yi loè ba ese Nyúè.	not that we are sufficient of ourselves, to account anything as from ourselves; but our sufficiency is from God;
Ŋwɛɛ Ntòo Bfòo [ŋwɛ̄ː ntòː bfòː] cn 7.	month of February.
Ñwáè ce e koèñ máè ka', a ñwáè ce e ce yu' wa blaèa ka'. Blaèa ce weèe ce yu' na, yu wa ka', yu blaèa yaè Ta ce e m tuu máè.	He who doesn't love me doesn't keep my words. The word which you hear isn't mine, but the Father's who sent me.
ba Matïìyoè, ba Tomaês, ba Jáms muu Alfïìyoès, ba Saimúèn ce a m ce too ená ñwáè ntee luèu-luu,	Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Simon, who was called the Zealot;
Woweèe a ká' a ce yá buu. E laa neè woweèe tatap se enáê, “Weèe fa geèe tá ñwáè moè' riñ ka'.”	"Their eyes were opened. Jesus strictly commanded them, saying, ""See that no one knows about this."""
Weèe rïìñ aèmboè ya ñgeèe yi m ba aè nfeè' ce máè m ce geèe ba ndeèe Jus naè. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè máè ce fa ñgá' neè ñgaâa cor seê. Máè m ce koèñ máná cor ba aègho ka'.	For you have heard of my way of living in time past in the Jews' religion, how that beyond measure I persecuted the assembly of God, and ravaged it.
E m ce laèa ba aèmboè seèe. Ñwáè nfaè' mnsuu aè ba rïìñ ená e be túr ñgúè' moè' efa byee ce e faè', ñwáè rkep riñ foñ ená e be túr ñgúè' moè' efa byee anaè.	or does he say it assuredly for our sake? Yes, it was written for our sake, because he who plows ought to plow in hope, and he who threshes in hope should partake of his hope.
Tá m ka' vúè, loèr yoè nfeè' ce be' blaâa Nyúè neè beèe, cep woweèe, ker ce yá'ni woweèe.	Until I come, pay attention to reading, to exhortation, and to teaching.
M ka' ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger Yú' Nyúè baná kúú Nyúè yi vúè neè weèe.	But if I by the Spirit of God cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come upon you.
Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa ená ká? Yi laèa ba enáê, “Blaâa Nyúè vi yu aètútú neè wáè; vi yu ku wáâ cuèu, a ba njep wáâ ntee.” Blaèa anaè yu blaèa ce vi ce suñ aèmboè rbyemïì ce weèr ce feè'shi.	"But what does it say? ""The word is near you, in your mouth, and in your heart;"" that is, the word of faith, which we preach:"
E m caèasi nfeè' ka'. E m niñ aè mndap mloo a ce feè'shi aèmboè Jisoès, a ce laèa enáê, “E yu muu Nyúè.”	Immediately in the synagogues he proclaimed the Christ, that he is the Son of God.
faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú lo jep njo' ñgá' ce beèe a ce fa weèe na ka'. Weèe aè rïìñ foñ ená ñgá' ca yu ñgá' ce e be kuè ba neè beèe wááwá ce a byemi neè Jisoès.	that no one be moved by these afflictions. For you know that we are appointed to this task.
E ker tuu moè', woweèe a koo a yú, awá e ker tuu weèe mo', woweèe a lip weèe mo', a yúshi weèe mo'.	Again he sent another; and they killed him; and many others, beating some, and killing some.
Ncwaʼ e ke boŋ à nyaʼ cwaʼshi sê.	Pounded coco yams is very nice when you eat with pounded garden eggs.
Baná seèe yá'ni riñ buu btatap ce vi yu aèmboè Jisos Kraâis tá seèe bo ba bleebeèe aè buu Nyúè. Seèe fa kuè cu ba aè ryá'nïì ce a m káè' a yá'ni seèe naè ka'. Seèe aè yá'ni a riñ wáá ená beèe a ba kupse, borni efa rgeèe buu ce aède' vi vú neè rkwe, byemi ba neè Nyúè.	Therefore leaving the teaching of the first principles of Christ, let us press on to perfection--not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works, of faith toward God,
Ñwaè' ca yi ce suñ aèmboè raèraâ Jisos Kraâis ce e m ba muu Dávïìd, Dávïìd aè ba muu Abraèhaêm.	The book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Wee weèe foñ yu aèbee weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe. Weèe aè m yu' nsuñ kuu yuu mini, ce e yu ená aède' weèe luêñ, a byemi neè Jisoès. Weèe aè ka' byemi wa'a, Nyúè aè fa weèe ncoèo ce e ce duèñshi ená weèe yu yïì beèe. Ncoèo anaè yu Yú' Rara ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè yïì beèe.	in whom you also, having heard the word of the truth, the Good News of your salvation--in whom, having also believed, you were sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise,
Njáèá beèe ca a loèr ená a rïìñ Nyúè seê, buu ce woweèe a ce geèe vi ce duèñshi ená woweèe a máñni Nyúè. Woweèe a yu beâe bcicïì, a tee btu. AÈde' woweèe a geèe yuu boèñboñ ka'.	They profess that they know God, but by their works they deny him, being abominable, disobedient, and unfit for any good work.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè buu ce vi koni weèr na, weèr aè so vi wááwá a misïî, njo' ñwáè ce e m koèñ weèr.	No, in all these things, we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
Rla' Jopaè li ku ba aètútú rla' Lidaè. Beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès a ka' yu' ená Pitaè yu aè rla' Lidaè, woweèe a tuu beèe a mmbaa ená a du laa neè ye enáê, “Kyer wáè, vúè cárcár, vú yá weèr.”	As Lydda was near Joppa, the disciples, hearing that Peter was there, sent two men to him, imploring him not to delay in coming to them.
Bsàʼ bvi yu fɛ?	Where are the cutlasses.
Tomas ce a m ce too ye ená rfar naè, aè laa neè beèe ce a woweèe a m ce yá'ni buu Jisoès naè enáê, “Seèe du aèmbuèu Jisoès foñ tá seèe bo duè kwe seèe woweèe.”	"Thomas therefore, who is called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, ""Let's go also, that we may die with him."""
Ñwáè aè ka' táá mbetar beèe, baná ñgaèñ táá aè btu beèe aèñgoo. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè Nyúè, e ku ba moè'sir.	Now a mediator is not between one, but God is one.
Woweèe a m yá yap ená blaèa ce máè m ce feè'shi anaè aè m fa Nyúè a fa neè máè neè mini-ñwáè. A m yá ená Nyúè aè m tuu máè ená m du fe'shi blaèa ca neè beèe enje jáá, aèmboè Nyúè aè m fa blaèa ca foñ neè Pitaè ená e du fe'shi yi ba neè Jus naè.	but to the contrary, when they saw that I had been entrusted with the Good News for the uncircumcision, even as Peter with the Good News for the circumcision
Mɛ̀ lɛ̀ kàràshin njep lâm.	I have filed the lamp with kerosene.
Beèe a ce suñ aèmboè weèe aè m koni weèr aè nfeè' ce weèr aè m vúè ca'ni weèe naè. A ce suñ foñ aèmboè weèe aè m maè'shi mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na a ce faè' ba neè Nyúè ce e yu nteèe, aè ba Nyúâ mini,	For they themselves report concerning us what kind of a reception we had from you; and how you turned to God from idols, to serve a living and true God,
Zhi bòŋ enɛ muu ŋkɛʼ byɛʼ yuu ce zhi rìr kaʼ.	It is not good that a small child should carry something heavy.
E beesïì enáê, “Yáê, weèe be duè niñ aè múè rla', tá weèe tarte weèe mbañruèñwáè moè' ce e byáè' ntúñ mdip. Duè neè fa yeâ mbuèu, niñ mbe ndaèp ce e be niñ,	"He said to them, ""Behold, when you have entered into the city, a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him into the house which he enters."
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè ku cu aè rjaèasïì ñgaâa fuèp. Mboè beèe ce a ke fa weèe ñgá', ker ce loèr weèe ce duè aègho mbe ndap mnsa' yu ñgaâa mbaèa a?	But you have dishonored the poor man. Don't the rich oppress you, and personally drag you before the courts?
E m gú'shi neè mkúúshi, a waa mbekïì enáê, “Tataê, fa láè yuu bebep ca mbe waâp nduè ka'.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a kwe.	"He kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, ""Lord, don't hold this sin against them!"" When he had said this, he fell asleep."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè túr ntee boèñboñ neè seèe seê, a fa seèe ñger. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Nyúè baèa ñgaâa naèatu, a ce fa ñger neè beèe ce a suèusi yaèp nyor njep nsheè.”	"But he gives more grace. Therefore it says, ""God resists the proud, but gives grace to the humble."""
e be koni buu aè nfeè' e seè'ni caèa aèmboè e m túr naè kaèñ rjeèe. E be koni mndap, bfúr, bjaèr, mma, boo, ba mñkúè. Geewa'a beèe a be kuè ce fa ye ñgá'. E ba mbe nfeè' ce e be keè vúè, e koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	but he will receive one hundred times more now in this time, houses, brothers, sisters, mothers, children, and land, with persecutions; and in the age to come eternal life.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger mbenduè nshe ce e m ba mbenduè ryáá naè yu beèe ce a ke yu' nlaèa Nyúè, ku yu' rboèñ aègho seê,	These in the same way are those who are sown on the rocky places, who, when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with joy.
E ka' ba ñwáè wa'a, a ker lor yi tu njep nsheè a yu'ni neè Nyúè a byemi aè rkwe; a ka' kwe a kwe ba rkwe ce embe kïìntaa.	And being found in human form, he humbled himself, becoming obedient to death, yes, the death of the cross.
E laa enáê, “Weèe aè ba ce roèo máè njoká? Weèe aè ba rïìñ weená yu ya dïì' aè rba mbe Ndaèp yaè ta ka' a?”	"He said to them, ""Why were you looking for me? Didn't you know that I must be in my Father's house?"""
Ñwáè nsïìp ce e ce geèe yuu bebep aè bú' ncir. Yuu bebep yu aè rbú' ncir.	Everyone who sins also commits lawlessness. Sin is lawlessness.
Nfeè' múcaèr tá m vú yá weèe, ce Tata Nyúè aè ka' koêñ, tá m bo rïìñ máná ñger Nyúè yi yu njep ñgaâa naèatu ca káè woweèe a ku ce bu' ba cuèu lá.	But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord is willing. And I will know, not the word of those who are puffed up, but the power.
Woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi ená e yu mbe ñgoo beèe ce a woweèe a m ce duè. A ka' jáèr aè noèñ bïìi, a yá ye ka', a ká' a ce roèo ye aè múè bfúr wap ba bkar wap.	but supposing him to be in the company, they went a day's journey, and they looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances.
Máâ Táshoès ce máè sañ ñwaè' ca ce caè'ni weèe foñ aè rlii yïìseèe Tataê.	I, Tertius, who write the letter, greet you in the Lord.
Njeñwáè moè' aè m ba mbo ce yú' mo' yi m ba njep ye a gee ye e yañ aè bfeè' ncoèp-waami-aè-rrúèú, a gú'mi seê, a moo aè rnaèa nyor mbekïì laèr.	Behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and she was bent over, and could in no way straighten herself up.
Baná aèmboè buu bbebep aè túr ñger mbenduè beèe, a vú neè rkwe, yi yu foñ ená rboâñntee Nyúè li túr ñger aè rgeèe beèe tá a ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè njo' yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis.	that as sin reigned in death, even so grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Mɛ̀ kòŋ ye sê, geewaʼa e kòŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ.	I love him so much but he doesnʼt love me.
AÈde' Ndap Nyúè ba yïì mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na a ba aè yuu mo'sir aè njáâá ká? Seèe yu ndap neè Nyúè ce e yu nteèe. Yi ku ba aèmboè Nyúè aè laèa. E laèa enáê, “M be cu a waâp mú, jáèr a waâp mú, ba yaèp Nyúè tá woweèe a ba yaè beèe.	"What agreement has a temple of God with idols? For you are a temple of the living God. Even as God said, ""I will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they will be my people."""
AÈde' woweèe a duñshïì neè wáè ená buu ce a ce suñ ená máè geèe na vi yu mini ka'.	Nor can they prove to you the things of which they now accuse me.
Ka' woweèe a m túr yuu mo' ce aède' a m ba noñ mbenjïì mo, yú ye ka' wa'a, woweèe a m laèa neè Pailáèt ená a yú ye.	Though they found no cause for death, they still asked Pilate to have him killed.
Yo bo yi ka' gee wáè aè gee yuu bebep, aè tee yi ma'; yi yu aèndeèe ená aè niñ mbe dïû' rcu ce nfeseè, buu bo, neè ce ená aè túr mmbo mmbaa duè njep mor ce aètaè a liisïì ka'.	If your hand causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life maimed, rather than having your two hands to go into Gehenna, into the unquenchable fire,
Muu Ñwáè ye ye aè m vúè ená beèe a bo faè' neè ye ka'. E m vúè yi tá e bo faè', keèr fa li ryoèñ, tee beèe magoèr efa rkwe.”	"even as the Son of Man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life as a ransom for many."""
Buu ca aè ka' koni wa'a, Pol aè laa ená aède' e buu efa caèa aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ba aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè duè Jáèrusaláèm ka'. E m ker laa enáê, “M ka' du ba' aèfo, m ku du aè rla' Rum foñ.”	"Now after these things had ended, Paul determined in the spirit, when he had passed through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, saying, ""After I have been there, I must also see Rome."""
E ka' laèasi woweèe wáá a ko' mbe rtuèu aè rgeèe rloo.	After he had taken leave of them, he went up the mountain to pray.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Josáèf be kwe, rbyemïì li m geèe ye e laa ená beèe Isráèl a be keè loâ aè to' Ijïìp, a ker laa ená woweèe a ka' ke ce loè, a lor yi gúèú du aègho.	By faith, Joseph, when his end was near, made mention of the departure of the children of Israel; and gave instructions concerning his bones.
Banla be dù làa àtu zhì tâa.	Banla will go and speak on her fatherʼs behalf.
E beesïì a laa enáê, ‘Yaè taê, m be duè ka',’ a ka' laèa wa'a, a ker lo a kwa'shi a kupse yi ntee, a duê.	He answered, 'I will not,' but afterward he changed his mind, and went.
Woweèe a ka' baè' aè rla' IÌkonïìyoèm, a niñ mbe ndap rloo Jus aèmboè a m niñ aè rla' Antïìyoèk naè, a fe'shi boèñboñ seê. Jus magoèr seê, ker ba beèe enje jáá a byemïì.	It happened in Iconium that they entered together into the synagogue of the Jews, and so spoke that a great multitude both of Jews and of Greeks believed.
Weèe rïìñ ená weèe aè tarshi weèe Kraâis weèe. Mboè rtarshïì anaè li geèe weèe aè túr ñger a? Mboè ntee yi fúte weèe njobeè' Kraâis koèñ weèe a? Mboè weèe yu aèbee weèe Yú' Rara weèe a? Mboè weèe túr mntee bboèñboñ a ce koosimnse aègho a?	If there is therefore any exhortation in Christ, if any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassion,
Tu mo' efa nyaèa anaè yi m túr ma nfur moè' aè ba ce e m ba yú ye; nfur anaè aè m ba neè ke'se yi yu. Ñgoèñ wááwá yi m báèá nyaèa anaè a ká' a ce yu'ni ba neè nyaèa anaè.	One of his heads looked like it had been wounded fatally. His fatal wound was healed, and the whole earth marveled at the beast.
Máè yu' yuu mo' yi fúú e mbetar buu bteèe anaè aèmboè njeèndoñ wa'a, a laa enáê, “Beèe a be loèr mbaèa ce a faè' aè noèñ, yuu ndoñ saèa aègho moè'sir, buwa'laèr a yuu mndoñ msañ vi btaar. Fa bepsi mgúr ba mruè' ka'.”	"I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, ""A choenix of wheat for a denarius, and three choenix of barley for a denarius! Don't damage the oil and the wine!"""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná ñwáè wááwá ku ba aèmboè e m ba tá Nyúè ka' ká' ye.	Let each man stay in that calling in which he was called.
AÈ m ba aè mnoèñ anaè Pitaè aè natïì mbekïì a táá aè múè yïì beèe ce a m ba aèmboè beèe rjeèe neè beèe mmbaa, a laa enáê,	In these days, Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples (and the number of names was about one hundred twenty), and said,
E m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè, a riñ yuu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè ye. Nyúè aè m ye leè' ená ñwáè moè' embe ndúè' Dávïìd be keè ye kúú Dávïìd.	Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him that of the fruit of his body, according to the flesh, he would raise up the Christ to sit on his throne,
E tuu nèŋguu rò.	She has gone across the river.
Máè rïìñ ye ñgeèe. Máè rïìñ aèmboè weèe aè kur ntee a fa' a ke' ce sáè ka'. Máè rïìñ máná weèe ce maè'shi beâe bbebep a weâe mú ka'. Weèe aè fyá' beèe ce a ce laèa ená woweèe a yu ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès naè, a yá ená woweèe a ce bo'shi bo'shi.	"I know your works, and your toil and perseverance, and that you can't tolerate evil men, and have tested those who call themselves apostles, and they are not, and found them false.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	3	Weèe aè kur ntee a yá ñgá' njo' máè, a ke' sá ka'.	You have perseverance and have endured for my name's sake, and have not grown weary.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	4	Ka' yi yu wa'a, m be suñ weèe faèa moè' ce weèe aè geèe. Weèe ker koñ máè aèmboè weèe aè m koèñ ka'.	But I have this against you, that you left your first love.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	5	Kuushi neè njáèá njïì ce weèe aè m koèñ máè naè, kupse, ma' yeè buu bbebep, ce gee ba ñgeèe ce weèe aè m ce geèe entombïì. Weèe aè ka' tá kupse ka' m vú ca'si yeè tábuèr lam caè.	Remember therefore from where you have fallen, and repent and do the first works; or else I am coming to you swiftly, and will move your lampstand out of its place, unless you repent.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	6	Geewa'a, weèe aè geèe yuu mo' ce yi yu boèñboñ. Weèe aè baèa buu bbebep ce beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Nikoèlaès a ce geèe. Weèe aè ku baa aèmboè máè baèa foñ.	But this you have, that you hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	7	“Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá. Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap caa rmoèoshïì, baná m be maè'shi tá ñgaèñ ye efa mbaâñ ce ryoèñ ce yi yu mbe nsuu Nyúè.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes I will give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the Paradise of my God.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	8	Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Sïìmainaè enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáè ce e m ba entoèmbïì a ker ba elúèsimbuèu. E m kwe a kúti nteèe.	To the angel of the assembly in Smyrna write: ""The first and the last, who was dead, and has come to life says these things:"
Mbuèu moè' be keèr ba aègho neè ñwáè aè ryá'ni bfúr vi, laèa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Rïìñ neè Taèr’ ka', njobeè' woweèe wááwá a be keè rïìñ máè, ká' embe beâe bká'ká' du ba' mbe beâe bgoèrgoèr.	They will not teach every man his fellow citizen, and every man his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for all will know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them.
Seemoè' weèe ce kwaè'shi ená weèr ce laèa ená weèr yu ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraâis wa'a, a ce tá'shi ba yer tu. Yi yu wa' ka'. Weèr ce laèa buu ca ba aè bsii Nyúè aèmboè beèe Jisos Kraêis. Bkar waê, buu ce weèr ce geèe na, weèr ce geèe vi wááwá tá weèe bo táá tatap njep Jisos Kraêis.	Again, do you think that we are excusing ourselves to you? In the sight of God we speak in Christ. But all things, beloved, are for your edifying.
Yuu ce yi geèe yuu seèe ce laèa aèmboè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì na yi ba rara seê, yi yu ená ñwáè tañshi tañshïì moè' aè vúè a ba yi ba aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk.	This is yet more abundantly evident, if after the likeness of Melchizedek there arises another priest,
AÈ ka' ba yi neè njeñwáè, tu ko'si aè ba yuu boèñboñ njobeè' Nyúè aè m fa ye nyúè'tu saèsap tá e bo tá'shi yi tu aègho.	But if a woman has long hair, it is a glory to her, for her hair is given to her for a covering.
Weèr ce koèñ ená weèe koosi bbor ka'. Weèr ce koèñ ená weèe ba ba aèmboè beèe ce a ce byemi yuu ce yi yu mini, a ke' ce bu' ka'. Weèe aè ba ba wa'a njobeè' njáèá beèe ca yu beèe ce a be koni buu ce Nyúè aè kaè' neè yïì beèe.	that you won't be sluggish, but imitators of those who through faith and patience inherited the promises.
Yàa ŋgwe à mʉ waa nè tʉ sê.	My dog barked last night too much.
A mbuèu ce m ce kuushi wáè ená aè yáási bfee rfaè' ce Nyúè aè m fa neè wáè aè noèñ ce máè m la' mmbo mbe wáâ tuè naè.	For this cause, I remind you that you should stir up the gift of God which is in you through the laying on of my hands.
Wɛ̀ kaʼ fooshi mbàa ŋwɛ̀, à fa nè ŋgàŋ.	If you pick somebodyʼs money, give it to him.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Buu ce m ce yá'ni yu wa ka', yu ba vi ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	"Jesus therefore answered them, ""My teaching is not mine, but his who sent me."
Mɛ̀ bɛ̀rni à toto kèŋ a yɛ ye.	I peeped through the door hole and saw him.
Pol aè beesïì enáê, “Maèsaè Fástoès, tu yi ce kar máè embo ka', buu ce m ce laèa vi yu mini, a ba neè bfee-ñwáè.	"But he said, ""I am not crazy, most excellent Festus, but boldly declare words of truth and reasonableness."
Yi yu ená aède' weèr gee yuu mo' ce aèbaè yi jepsïì yuu mini ka'. Weèr be kuè geèe ba yuu ce yi be geèe tá mini du ba entoèmbïì.	For we can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth.
AÈ ka baè njobeè' rbyemïì, rkwe li m joo Ánoèk ka'. Nyúè aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe buèu nteèe. Beèe a m ker yá ye ka' njobeè' Nyúè aè m loèr ye a du aègho. Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa ená tá Nyúè ka' keè loèr Ánoèk, yi ñgeèe yi m ba boèñboñ aè bsii Nyúè.	By faith, Enoch was taken away, so that he wouldn't see death, and he was not found, because God translated him. For he has had testimony given to him that before his translation he had been well pleasing to God.
Woweèe a ka' duè, a yá, yi ku ba aèmboè Jisoès aè m suñ woweèe naè. Woweèe a fár byee ñkaè' anaè.	They went, found things as he had told them, and they prepared the Passover.
Ŋgwaŋ a ŋkar àa.	Ngwang is my friend.
Bcïìndap Nyúè ca a ka' maè'shi woweèe kúti mbe buèu, ñgaâa ncïìñ njeèe ca a ká' a ce laèa fa waâp mú enáê, “Seèe du aè rla' Bátáèláèhám du yá ka yuu ce Tata aè suñ seèe ená yi koni na.”	"It happened, when the angels went away from them into the sky, that the shepherds said one to another, ""Let's go to Bethlehem, now, and see this thing that has happened, which the Lord has made known to us."""
Tá woweèe a ka' keè faè' rfaè' bdikïìn, baná a be fyá' woweèe boèñboñ seê. A ka' fyá' woweèe wa'a, yá ená woweèe a ghááte, woweèe a fa'.	Let them also first be tested; then let them serve if they are blameless.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a laa enáê, “Jisoès, kuushi máè aè nfeè' ce wáè ka' vú ce sa' yo kúú.”	"He said to Jesus, ""Lord, remember me when you come into your Kingdom."""
“Weèe aè ker yu' foñ ená a m laèa neè beèe eluâuñgoèñ enáê, ‘Ñwáè aè ka' ye leè' aè rgeèe yuu mo' neè Tata Nyúè, ñgaèñ fa buu efa rgeèe yuu anaè ka'.’	"Again you have heard that it was said to them of old time, 'You shall not make false vows, but shall perform to the Lord your vows,'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	34	M ce laèa ya neè weèe ená ñwáè fa kaèa ka', koo múcaèr. Ka' ce ená e kaa aè rlii rbuu áè, e fa kaèa ka', njobeè' rbuu yu kaèbaèraè' Nyúè.	but I tell you, don't swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne of God;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	35	Ka' ce ená e kaa aè rlii nshe áè, e fa kaèa ka', njobeè' nshe yu dïì' ce Nyúè e ke tár mi mkuèu. Ka' ce ená e kaa aè rlii Jáèrusaláèm áè, e fa kaèa ka' njobeè' rla' Jáèrusaláèm yu rla' ñkúú ñgoèr.	nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	36	Fa kaèa aè yo tu ka', njobeè' aède' aè gee mbúè nyúè'tu moè' fúp káè sii ka'.	Neither shall you swear by your head, for you can't make one hair white or black.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	37	Kuè laa ba wáná, áèno, tá yi ba wa' ghup, laa wáná, kaka', tá yi ba wa' ghup. Wáè ka' ker laa yuu mo' caa embo naè, baná yïì anaè yi loè ba ese Sataèn ce e yu ñwáâ mbembep.	But let your 'Yes' be 'Yes' and your 'No' be 'No.' Whatever is more than these is of the evil one.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	38	“Weèe aè yu' ená a m laèa enáê, ‘Ñwáè aè ka' bú' ñwáè rlir, baná a be bú' li foñ. Ñwáè aè ka' co' ñwáè rsoèñ baná a be co' li foñ.’	You have heard that it was said, 'An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.'"
Baná wáè ka' gú'shi neè máè, buu ca wááwá ba wo.”	"If you therefore will worship before me, it will all be yours."""
Ñgaâa mfaè', yu'ni neè neè wee mmasaè boèñboñ, gú'shi neè woweèe. Weèe fa kuè geèe wa' ba neè beèe ce a ce geèe buu bboèñboñ neè weèe, a ce loèr weèe aè beèe ka', geèe neè wa' foñ neè beèe ce yap ñgeèe yi yu tatap.	Servants, be in subjection to your masters with all fear; not only to the good and gentle, but also to the wicked.
Mer mkuu mi bùu.	Our beans have been eaten by weevils.
Ku ba ye ce e m fa mfa neè beèe. E m fa rfa neè beèe mo' ená woweèe a ba ñgaâa ntuu, a fa neè beèe mo' ená woweèe a suñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a rïîñ, a fa neè beèe mo' ená woweèe a kar mbekïì fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, a fa neè beèe mo' ená woweèe a ke'ni ñgaâa rbyemïì, ker yá'ni woweèe.	He gave some to be apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, shepherds and teachers;
a cu aèfo aè mñwáá btaar. E ka' ce tami nyor aè rduè aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè, a yá ená Jus a cu mncúè aè rkoo ye yú, e kwa'shïì aè rkúti duè njïû aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè.	When he had spent three months there, and a plot was made against him by Jews as he was about to set sail for Syria, he determined to return through Macedonia.
Ñwáè ce Yú' Nyúè yi yu njep yeâ ntee, e ke fyá' buu wááwá, riñ mbuèu efa gho, ka' beèe a fyá' ye, riñ njáèá ñwáè ce e yu ka' wa'a.	But he who is spiritual discerns all things, and he himself is judged by no one.
M ce loo ená e mú' wee bfee tá weèe bo rïìñ yi ñger ce yi caèa ñger bsïìp. Yu ñger ca ce e loèr a ce geèe rfaè' aègho njep viseâe mntee, ce seèe yu beèe ce seèe aè byemi neè ye. Ñger ce yi caèa ñger anaè ku ba ñger	and what is the exceeding greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to that working of the strength of his might
a ke' mbe buèu a shoo, a laa neè ye enáê, “Efataè.” Efataè ca yu ená, “Múè'ti.”	"Looking up to heaven, he sighed, and said to him, ""Ephphatha!"" that is, ""Be opened!"""
AÈmboè máè m laèa neè wáè aè nfeè' ce máè m ce duè aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè naè, m ker ce laèa neè wáè ená aè ku cu aè rla' Áfásoès, tá aè bo laèa neè beèe mo' ce a ce yá'ni ryá'nïì mnde' naè ená woweèe a borni njáèá ryá'nïì anaè.	As I urged you when I was going into Macedonia, stay at Ephesus that you might command certain men not to teach a different doctrine,
Nyúè aè laèa ca neè seèe, e laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' koñ Nyúè, baná e be kuè koèñ nfúr yïì foñ.”	This commandment we have from him, that he who loves God should also love his brother.
E yu ñwáâ mini. E ke sa' mnsa', teni aè njïû yáánïì. E fa ñgá' neè ma kwaèraè ce e m bepsi ñgoèñ neè saèkïì naè. E kúsi mcucu' neè kwaèraè ca njobeè' e m yúshi yïì beèe ce a m ce faè' neè ye.”	"for true and righteous are his judgments. For he has judged the great prostitute, who corrupted the earth with her sexual immorality, and he has avenged the blood of his servants at her hand."""
Jus aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè a ka' yu' ená Pol ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè rla' Báèriyaè foñ, woweèe a vú foñ a barsi beèe ce a m ba aèfo ená a woweèe a ká' ñgá'.	But when the Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Beroea also, they came there likewise, agitating the multitudes.
Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “Mbañruèñwáè caê, máè rïìñ yuu ce aè ce laèa na ka'.” E ka' kuè bii ce laèa wa'a, nduñgúp aè toñ.	"But Peter said, ""Man, I don't know what you are talking about!"" Immediately, while he was still speaking, a rooster crowed."
E ma' ñgaèa ca neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m túr ce fik mbe yeâ ñka'. E m naèti a du a ce fyá' ená yi yú lá, a ka' fyá', yi yú ka'.	"He spoke this parable. ""A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none."
E laa neè ye enáê, “Naèti, lor muu ba yïì maê, tá weèe woweèe kúti aè ñgoâñ Isráèl, njobeè' beèe ce a m ce roèo aè ryú muu ca, a kweñger.”	Arise and take the young child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those who sought the young child's life are dead.
Zhi bòŋ à rtɛɛnjìŋsaʼ mnàŋ kaʼ.	It is not good to bear false witness.
Seâe ce cu wa'a, ce keè' nfeè' ce Jisos Kraâis be vúè neè vi bghoènïì, tá yi foèo yi yááti aèwañ. E yu yïìseèe Nyúâ ñgoèr, a ker ba ñwáè rjaè'.	looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory of our great God and Savior, Jesus Christ;
A ka' cute, e lor bráâd saèambaê ba nca caè, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, woweèe a gapshïì neè beèe anaè.	and he took the seven loaves and the fish. He gave thanks and broke them, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
Beèe a be juèu weèe embe ndaèp rloo. Nfeè' ce gháá ce ñwáè ce e be yú weèe, be kwaè'shi ená e geèe ba rfaè' Nyúè.	They will put you out of the synagogues. Yes, the time comes that whoever kills you will think that he offers service to God.
E be keè geèe tá beèe magoèr efa múè beèe Isráèl a kúti njeptii Tata ce e yu yaèp Nyúè.	He will turn many of the children of Israel to the Lord, their God.
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Seèe ce duè wa'a tá a du fa Muu Ñwáè mbaè mmbo beâe bgoèrgoèr efa mú ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir. Woweèe a be sa' ye, teni ená a yú ye, keèr loèr ye fa mbe mmbo beèe enje jáá.	"Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem. The Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scribes. They will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles.
Mark	Maêk	10	34	Woweèe a be coosi ye, ce ye neè mce, lïìp ye neè byáánsoè, yú ye. Mnoèñ vi ba btaar e fúú efa rkwe.”	They will mock him, spit on him, scourge him, and kill him. On the third day he will rise again."
E bòo zhi tu nè cɛ̀ʼ.	He has wrapped his head with a cloth.
E ka' yu' ená a Jisoâs aè rla' Nasaráèt, e ká' a ce laèa mbekïì enáê, “Jisoès, Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè máè.”	"When he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out, and say, ""Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!"""
Beèe ce a m ba mnfeèp, ba beèe ce a m ba mntáèñ a m vúè a yá ye mbe Ndaèp Nyúè anaè, e gee woweèe a luêñ.	The blind and the lame came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
E ker laa mbe dïì' mo' foñ enáê, “Máè ce wáè ená aè ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì aè nfeè' wááwá aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba naè.”	"As he says also in another place, ""You are a priest forever, after the order of Melchizedek."""
Laèa tá woweèe a duse aè mla' ce mi yu aètútú, ba mïì ce mi yu aè mñkúè, duè yuu byee, ye.”	"Send them away, that they may go into the surrounding country and villages, and buy themselves bread, for they have nothing to eat."""
Máè ker yá yuu mo' aèmboè yi yááti mbe buèu. Máè yá njáèá nyaèa moè' e feeseè nyaèaroè. Nyaèa anaè aè m ce baèñ. E m túr btu saèambaê, a túr mdoñ rúêú. E m soèp mtaa kúú mbe btu saèamba anaè wááwá.	Another sign was seen in heaven. Behold, a great red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and on his heads seven crowns.
Ka' woweèe a m yá buu ca neè map mmir wa'a, beèe magoèr efa woweèe a m geèe buu ce ntee yi boñ Nyúè ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a kweñgeèr, bgúèú vi sañsïì nyor aè rïìñ.	However with most of them, God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the wilderness.
Ñwáè ce rïìtu yi ce koo ye neè máè, ker ba neè wa blaèa, baná rïìtu yi be koo Muu Ñwáè neè ye foñ, aè nfeè' ce Muu Ñwáè be keè vúè neè yi foèo-ñwáè, ba foèo yïì Taê, ker ba foèo bcïìndap Nyúâ brara.	For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words, of him will the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes in his glory, and the glory of the Father, and of the holy angels.
“Ya ntee yi ce fa máè ñgá' seè'ni seê. M be ka' laa má ká? M laa máná ‘Yaè Taê, fúr máè efa ñgá' ce e yu seè'ni naè’ a? AÈi', m be laèa wa' ka'. Máè m vúè tá m bo yá njáèá ñgá' ca.	"Now my soul is troubled. What shall I say? 'Father, save me from this time?' But for this cause I came to this time.
John	Joân	12	28	Yaè Taê, geèe tá a ku'si lo rlii.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a yu' njeèndoñ aè laa embe buèu enáê, “Máè geèe wa'a, m be keèr geèe.”	Father, glorify your name! Then there came a voice out of the sky, saying, ""I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again."""
Woowèe a sɛsi nàʼ taar.	They have slaughtered three cows.
Fa ye ka' njo' mkwaè'shïì mi ñwáè anaè, ke' ba njo' mo ka'. Seemoè' ñwáè moè' be laèa enáê, “AÈde' m bornïì efa rgeèe yuu mo' njobeè' ñwáè moè' ce kwaè'shi ená yuu anaè yi yu bebep njoká?	Conscience, I say, not your own, but the other's conscience. For why is my liberty judged by another conscience?
Yú' Rara yi m ruusi Stáfaèn, e ke' mbe buèu a yá foâo Nyúè, a yá Jisoès aèmboè e táá aè rkoo maâ' Nyúè.	But he, being full of the Holy Spirit, looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
AÈ ka' ba njoká seè'ni ce weèe ce koèñ aè rmoèoshi Nyúè aè njáèá njïì ce weèe ce láè ntáèr mbenduè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès, ce ka' weèr káè wer bta áè, a m túr ñger aè rbyáè' ka'.	Now therefore why do you tempt God, that you should put a yoke on the neck of the disciples which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
Ñgaèpni yi ka' ba mbe ndaèp, aède' ndap anaè táá ka'.	If a house is divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
E ke ba aè nfeè' anaè, beèe a ba ce a be ce keè'ni muu anaè, keèr ce fyá' buu ce yu vi naè neè ye caar tá bfeè' ce yïì ta aè m láè naè vi gháá.	but is under guardians and stewards until the day appointed by the father.
Nfò à làa enɛ e be kʉʉsi mcʉcʉʼ yuu ce wɛ̀ m̀ gêe nè ye nà.	Nfor is promising vengeance following what you did to him.
E laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Buu aè bi aè mñkúè goèr, ñgaâa rkep a ba múcaèr.	"Then he said to his disciples, ""The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the laborers are few."
Nyúè be laè' woweèe ba neè ñgá' njobeè' woweèe a fa ñgá' neè beèe mo' foñ. Woweèe a yu' rboèñ aè rgeèe buu bbebep ce beèe a ke geèe neètú' naè ba neèmootïì. Yap ñgeèe yi coosi weèe. Weèe woweèe e cu aèbee ye byee, woweèe a kúti mbenjïì, ce yu' rboèñ njep múè buu bbebep.	receiving the wages of unrighteousness; people who count it pleasure to revel in the daytime, spots and blemishes, reveling in their deceit while they feast with you;
E ka' laèa wa'a, beèe Farïìsi ba beèe Saduèsï a ká' a ce lapni, a fúú nto' baa.	When he had said this, an argument arose between the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the assembly was divided.
Ñwáè ca aè ka' tá baè loè ba ese Nyúè ka', e ba geèe yuu mo' ka'.”	"If this man were not from God, he could do nothing."""
Woowèe a dù ba à nduunjǐ jɛɛ.	They have taken a different road.
Bfúr waê, máè laèa buu ca neè weèe, a lor AÈpoloès ba ya tu nyor aèmboè rduèñshïì wa'a, tá weèe bo yá'ni ese weèr aè rcu, aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú bo naèa tu neè ñwáè moè', loèr moè' aè yuu cicïì ka'.	Now these things, brothers, I have in a figure transferred to myself and Apollos for your sakes, that in us you might learn not to think beyond the things which are written, that none of you be puffed up against one another.
Yïì ta aè m noèñ a ce yañ. Mbáp aè m ce fúte ye, e ker ce to' a ce fïìñshi. Pol aè niñ mbe dïì' e m noèñ, a gee rloo, a lá mmbo mbe yeâ nduè, e ke'seè.	It happened that the father of Publius lay sick of fever and dysentery. Paul entered in to him, prayed, and laying his hands on him, healed him.
Pitaè aè lor nfeè' a nashi yuu ce e m geèe anaè neè woweèe boèñboñ seê, a laa enáê,	But Peter began, and explained to them in order, saying,
Túè' aè ka' sii, bfúr a lor Pol ba Silaès a du aègho aè rla' Báèriyaè. Woweèe a ka' baè', a du mbe ndaèp rloo Juês.	The brothers immediately sent Paul and Silas away by night to Beroea. When they arrived, they went into the Jewish synagogue.
E gwàr ce a ceeshi à mncùŋ waami.	He cut the tree and divided it into eight logs.
Máè rïìñ yuu ce m gee aè nfeè' ce buu vi gha' máè, a riñ yuu ce m gee aè nfeè' ce máè túr buu goèr. Máè lááte aè buu anaè wááwá, a tami nyor, ka' aè se'ká, káè máè ye áè, káè máè ye ka' áè; káè máè túr áè, káè máè túr ka' áè!	I know how to be humbled, and I know also how to abound. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be filled and to be hungry, both to abound and to be in need.
