E yu mbena ka'. E fúú efa rkwe aèmboè e m laèa naè. Vúè neè yá mbe dïì' ce yi gúèú yi mú noêñ.	He is not here, for he has risen, just like he said. Come, see the place where the Lord was lying.
Bfee Nyúè ce weèr ce laèa na yu ba vi bfee ce vi m ba aè bsúèti, beèe a m rïìñ ka'. Tá Nyúè ka' keè geèe ñgoèñ ca, e m kwaè'shi wáá, a lá ená e be geèe buu ca tá seèe bo túr ñgúè' moè' efa yi foèo.	But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, the wisdom that has been hidden, which God foreordained before the worlds for our glory,
E beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè suñ weèe wáá, weèe aè ce yu' ka'. Weèe ce koèñ ená m ker suñ weèe njoká? Weâe koèñ aè rba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu foñ a?”	"He answered them, ""I told you already, and you didn't listen. Why do you want to hear it again? You don't also want to become his disciples, do you?"""
A m baèptir beèe ce a m byemi yuu ce Pitaè aè m laèa anaè. Beèe ce a m kyeèse nyor aè múè ñgaâa rbyemïì nyúè anaè a m ba aèmboè beèe ncúèkïì taar wa'a.	Then those who gladly received his word were baptized. There were added that day about three thousand souls.
Bkaŋ bwoo bvi ruu a?	Are your pans full?
njobeè' ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rboñshi li ryoèñ baná ñgaèñ be bá li, ñwáè ce e ka' tá boñshi li ryoèñ ka', njo' máè, baná ñgaèñ be koni li.	For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life for my sake, the same will save it.
Ŋgʉp yap zhi yû?	Where are their fowls.
Wèr be kapni ntaa mutù anà.	We will beat the price of that car.
Woweèe a ka' vúè yá Jisoès, a bu' mmbo neè ye ená a woweèe a cu. Jisoès aè byemïì, a cu a woweèe aè mnoâñ bbaa.	So when the Samaritans came to him, they begged him to stay with them. He stayed there two days.
Mdip mi ruu njep kaŋ.	The pan is full of water.
Baná weèe riñ ená beèe ce a byemi neè Nyúè a beèe ce a yu boo Abraèhaêm.	Know therefore that those who are of faith, the same are children of Abraham.
E ghoèni weèe aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá, a gee weèe aè túr bfee bboèñboñ, a ker fa weèe ñger aè rfeè'shi vi blaèa.	that in everything you were enriched in him, in all speech and all knowledge;
Caè'ni neè bfúr wer wááwá neè weèr. Baa woweèe nje nyoèr aè beèe Nyúè.	Greet all the brothers with a holy kiss.
Ŋwɛɛ Ncoʼ Mkuu [ŋwɛ̄ː ntʃɔ́ʔ mkūː] cn 7.	month of June.
Jus a ka' yá ku' beèe ca, a ko'ndoñ, a sár yuu ce Pol aè m laèa, a cáp ye.	But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled with jealousy, and contradicted the things which were spoken by Paul, and blasphemed.
M ka' vú ca'ni weèe baná a nfeè' taar seè'ni aèmboè máè caè'ni weèe. Kuushi neè enáê, “A ka' vú neè mnsa' ená ñwáè aè geèe yuu bebep, baná a be sa' mnsa' anaè ce beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mntaar áè, a ka' táá njïìnsa' ená ñgaèñ aè geèe faèa anaè ghup.”	"This is the third time I am coming to you. ""At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established."""
Mɛ̀ fɛ̀r ntàʼtèe.	I have done work.
Ñwáè ce aède' e laa ená beèe ce Nyúè aè ce a yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep yu nda? Nyúè a ñwáè ce e geèe seèe aè ba byáánïì.	Who could bring a charge against God's chosen ones? It is God who justifies.
E se fa mɛ̌ mbùu.	He is pursuing me persistently.
Wèr à lèʼte enɛ wèr be dù kaʼ.	We have refused to go.
njobeè' Nyúè ce e túr ñger wááwá aè geèe ku' buu bboèñboñ neè máè. Li rlii li yu rrara.	For he who is mighty has done great things for me. Holy is his name.
Weèe yu seè'ni aèmboè boo bbeer ce a bi wa'a. Baná weèe aè ba koèñ aè rnyoñ mmbee ce aè yú' ce mi yu mrara, tá weèe bo kuè', luèñ.	as newborn babies, long for the pure milk of the Word, that you may grow thereby,
Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá beèe a yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e ce vúè mbe múè mmbaè' embe buèu neè ñger-ñwáè, ker ba neè foèo-ñwáè.	Then they will see the Son of Man coming in clouds with great power and glory.
Jisoès aè m nyoñ mruè' anaè efa kúèsha. E ka' nyoñ wáá, a laa enáê “Yi mïì.” A kár tu, a ma'shi li ryoèñ neè Nyúè.	"When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, ""It is finished."" He bowed his head, and gave up his spirit."
Ñwáè tañshi tañshïì e ke táá mbekïì ce tañshi njáèá btañshïì ce e m be tañshi nfeè' aèñgoo wáá, aè mnoèñ wááwá. AÈde' njáèá btañshïì ca vi siñsïì buu bbebep ce beèe a geèe ka'.	Every priest indeed stands day by day serving and often offering the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins,
“M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná efa múè beèe wááwá ce bbyeèñge a bi, moè' a be caa Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe ka'. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e yu yi múcaèr se mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè aè caèa ye.	Most certainly I tell you, among those who are born of women there has not arisen anyone greater than John the Baptizer; yet he who is least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he.
E m laèa neè njeèndoñ ntatap enáê, “Wáp neè Nyúè, ku'si ye, njobeè' nfeè' aè gháá ce e be sa' beèe wááwá. Baná weèe gú'shi neè ye. E m geèe rbuu ba nshe, ba mdip ce mi ce fúú enjep nsheè ba mdip mñgoèrñgoèr.”	"He said with a loud voice, ""Fear the Lord, and give him glory; for the hour of his judgment has come. Worship him who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and the springs of waters!"""
Rïìñ neè ená mbuèu ce Tata aè kur ntee a ku cu caar a gháá seè'ni yu njobeè' e koèñ ená beèe a luêñ. Pol ce e yu nfúr yïìseèe ce seèe koèñ se naè aè m loèr bfee ce Nyúè aè m fa ye a sañ buu ca aègho mbe ñwaè' ce e m sañ neè weèe naè.	Regard the patience of our Lord as salvation; even as our beloved brother Paul also, according to the wisdom given to him, wrote to you;
Bkaèbaèraè' mo' ce vi m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa vi m kaari kaèbaèraè' ca a tarte. Beâe bgoèrgoèr ce a m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa a m cute mbe bkaèbaèraè' anaè a yar bcáâ' bbúú. Woweèe a m soèp mtaa kúú ce a m geèe neè guêl.	Around the throne were twenty-four thrones. On the thrones were twenty-four elders sitting, dressed in white garments, with crowns of gold on their heads.
Ŋwɛ̀ yaŋ ca yu yɛɛnì sèʼni.	This sick person is well now.
Weèe fa roèo ba yuu ce weèe be ye, ba yïì ce weèe be no ka'. Fa geèe tá mluè mi ce koo weèe ka'.	Don't seek what you will eat or what you will drink; neither be anxious.
Cañ mcañnïû mboèñmboñ ce aè rbyemïì, so ryoèñ ce nfeseè ce Nyúè aè m ká' wáè ená aè bo koni. Nyúè aè m ká' wáè ená aè bo koni njáèá ryoèñ ca, wáè konïì li nyúè ce wáè m laèa aè múè beèe ená wáè byemi, Nyúè aè yu' rboèñ naè.	Fight the good fight of faith. Lay hold of the eternal life to which you were called, and you confessed the good confession in the sight of many witnesses.
Sò be ce dù kǔumoʼsir.	We will be going together.
Yi yu wa' ka'. M ce suñ weèe ená weèe aè ka' tá kupse, maè' yeè buu bbebep ka', baná weèe wááwá be kweñger wa' foñ.”	"I tell you, no, but, unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way."""
“Ñwáè ryá'nïì, a koo njeñwáè ca a mbañruèñwáè.	"they told him, ""Teacher, we found this woman in adultery, in the very act."
E bipshïì neè beèe anaè enáê, “Yiseèe ncir yi byemi ená seèe gee ba yuu boèñboñ nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè káè yuu bebep? Yi byemi ená seèe ja' ñwáè jaè' káè seèe yú ñwáè yú?” Woweèe a beesïì yuu neè ye ka'.	"He said to them, ""Is it lawful on the Sabbath day to do good, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?"" But they were silent."
doc kùu tɛ à bo dù cɛr.	Go yourself so that you will move faster.
Yi yu aètáèr neè kaèmáêl aè rtose nje rlir nsaèraè' caa neè ñwáè mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	"It is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God."""
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir ca aè beesïì enáê, “Yu ñwáè ce e m koosimnse neè ye naè.” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Duè gee wa' foñ.”	"He said, ""He who showed mercy on him."" Then Jesus said to him, ""Go and do likewise."""
Yu njo' Jisoès ce Nyúè aè túr máè aè ntee boèñboñ, a fa máè fáñ aè rba ñwáè ntuu, tá beâe aè bto' wááwá a bo byemi neè ye, yu'ni neè ye, naèa ye mbekïì.	through whom we received grace and apostleship, for obedience of faith among all the nations, for his name's sake;
Woweèe a duê, a ce feè'shi neè beèe ená a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep.	They went out and preached that people should repent.
Kuè suñ neè máè ba yuu mo'sir. Yú' Rara yi m niñ njep weâe mntee njo' mncir ce weèe aè m ce láè, káè njo' blaâa Nyúè ce weèe aè m yu' a byemi?	I just want to learn this from you. Did you receive the Spirit by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?
Buu wááwá ce woweèe a ce geèe, a ce geèe ba ená beèe a bo yá woweèe. Woweèe a loè tar bbaèa guru wap ce a ke láè Blaâa Nyúè njo, cúú nje tuè, vi bárñgeèr seê, gee mcúèñcúñ efa wap bcáè' vi sapñgeèr seê.	But all their works they do to be seen by men. They make their phylacteries broad, enlarge the fringes of their garments,
A wɛ̀ yàa wàʼ kaʼ.	You are not my age-mate.
Pailáèt aè ká' beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa rsa', ker ba beèe ce a m ba aèfo,	Pilate called together the chief priests and the rulers and the people,
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Jud ce m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis, a ba nfúr Jáêms. M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè beèe ce Nyúè Taèr aè ce, a koêñ, Jisoès aè ce keè'ni beèe anaè.	Jude, a servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to those who are called, sanctified by God the Father, and kept for Jesus Christ:
Máè m byeè ñgúè buu, AÈpoloès aè ñwañshïì mdip aègho. Ñwáè ce e m geèe ñgúè buu ca aè fúú a ku', aè m ba ba Nyúè.	I planted. Apollos watered. But God gave the increase.
Yuu ce m ce laèa na, aè laèa Tata ená m laa ka'. M ka' ce yu' nyor, m ce laèa ba aèmboè lúr.	That which I speak, I don't speak according to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this confidence of boasting.
E gwàr ce e njep mbùu.	He has cut the tree from the bottom.
Beâe aè rla' anaè a m geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè weèr, a caa embe dïì' ce weèr aè m ce kwaè'shi. Woweèe a m koni weèr, a too mor njobeè' mbeèñ aè m ce gweè, mbáp aè ce fúte.	The natives showed us uncommon kindness; for they kindled a fire, and received us all, because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
Nyúè aè laèa mbe ñwaâ' Hoèsiyaè enáê, “Beèe ce a m ba yaè beèe ka', m be too woweèe ená yaè beèe. M be too to' ce máè m koèñ ka' ená ya to' ce m koèñ seê.”	"As he says also in Hosea, ""I will call them 'my people,' which were not my people; and her 'beloved,' who was not beloved."""
Weèe fa ba aèbee weèe beèe ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì ka' ka'. AÈde' yuu yáánïì ba yuu bebep a koo ñkar aè njáèá ká? Yuu ce rraa li túr aè rgeèe a túè'nji yu ká?	Don't be unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what fellowship have righteousness and iniquity? Or what fellowship has light with darkness?
njobeè' Dimaès aè koèñ yi yu ba buu enjep ñgoèñ, a ma'shi máè a du aè to' Táèsaèlonikaè. Krïûsáèn aè du yi ba aè ñgoâñ Gaèláshaè, Taitoès aè du yi ba aè ñgoâñ Daèlmashaè.	for Demas left me, having loved this present world, and went to Thessalonica; Crescens to Galatia, and Titus to Dalmatia.
Ca yi ka' caèa wáá, Judaès ce e m ba ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle aè nyáá mbe nfeè' ce a m ce beè' beèe, a súñ beèe mo' aè mbeèp yïì. Ye ye aè m kwe, beèe ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu, a da'seè.	After this man, Judas of Galilee rose up in the days of the enrollment, and drew away some people after him. He also perished, and all, as many as obeyed him, were scattered abroad.
“AÈmboè yi yu wa' seè'ni na, bfúr waê, máè rïìñ máná yuu ce weèe ker ba beèe ce a m ce sa' weèe aè m geèe neè Jisoès naè, weèe woweèe aè m ce geèe wa'a, a riñ yuu ce weèe aè m ce geèe ka'.	"Now, brothers, I know that you did this in ignorance, as did also your rulers.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	3	18	Nyúè aè m geèe ená yi ba wa'a tá yuu ce e m suñ beèe njïì enjep yi ñgaâa ntuu naè yi bo ghááte njo. E m laèa ená Kraâis ce e be tuu naè be keè yá ñgá'.	But the things which God announced by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he thus fulfilled.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	3	19	Kupse neè, ma' yeè buu bbebep, tá Nyúè bo siñsi yeè buu bbebep anaè. E ka' siñsi, e fa weèe nfeè' ce weèe be yu' rboèñ,	Repent therefore, and turn again, that your sins may be blotted out, so that there may come times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord,"
Ca yu ba njáèá ká? Waè' beèe ce máè m tuu máná a vú yá weèe naè, a m vúè wa'a ená m bo bo' weèe koshi buu ese weèe a?	Did I take advantage of you by anyone of them whom I have sent to you?
Ñgaâa keè'ni Ndap Nyúè a m kúti a du a yá beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe Farïìsïî. Woweèe a bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè duè a koo ye a vú aègho ka' njoká?”	"The officers therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees, and they said to them, ""Why didn't you bring him?"""
Seèe aè yá'ni aèmboè baèptïîr, ker ba aèmboè a ke la' beèe mmbo mbe tuè, a ker yá'ni aèmboè Nyúè be keè fúr beèe efa rkwe, a yá'ni aèmboè mnsa' ce a be keè sa', teni nfeseè.	of the teaching of baptisms, of laying on of hands, of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
Yi yá wa'a, ker du vú neè byú' mmo' vi saèambaê, ce vi bep a caa yi, a woweèe a niñ cu mbo, ñgaèñ misïì bep caa aèmboè e m ba entombïì naè.”	"Then he goes, and takes seven other spirits more evil than himself, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first."""
Fa cìʼ kìdàŋ anà kaʼ njoʼ zhi be gwè.	Donʼt shake that bench because it will fall.
njobeè' woweèe wááwá a m yá ye, a ce wáp. E ku laa neè woweèe aè nfeè' anaè enáê, “Kur neè ntee, a máè, fa wáp neè ka'.”	"for they all saw him, and were troubled. But he immediately spoke with them, and said to them, ""Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid."""
Asaè aè m bi Jásafaèr, Jásafaèr aè bi Joraèm, Joraèm aè bi OÈsayaè,	Asa became the father of Jehoshaphat. Jehoshaphat became the father of Joram. Joram became the father of Uzziah.
Ñwáè anaè aè ku luñ aè nfeè' anaè a lor li rwaèa a ce duè. Noèñ ce Jisoès aè m geèe ñwáè anaè e luñ efa yi yañ anaè, aè m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè.	Immediately, the man was made well, and took up his mat and walked. Now it was the Sabbath on that day.
Beèe mo' beèe nsaèambaê ce a m ce geèe wa'a, aè m ba boo Sïìkivaè ce e m ba ñwáè Jus moè' ce e m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.	There were seven sons of one Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, who did this.
Beèe ca wááwá a gaèpni buu moè' efa ku' yaèp buu ce a túr, a fa rfa aègho, ñgwañkúñwáè ca ce e túr yuu ka' aè loèr mú yuu wááwá ce e túr aè ba yïì ce yi ba jaè' ye, a fa.”	"for they all gave out of their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, gave all that she had to live on."""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu anaè a ka' yá aèmboè e geèe wa'a, woweèe a kuushïì yuu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Njáèá rkoèñnïì ce máè túr neè yoè ndap li be yú máè” naè.	"His disciples remembered that it was written, ""Zeal for your house will eat me up."""
Baná m ka' ce duè aè to' Spáên, tá m lá' caè'ni wee weèe tá seèe ku cu nfeè' múcaèr, tá m bo yu' rboèñ aè rba a weâe mú, tá weèe ka' jaè' máè tá m duê.	whenever I journey to Spain, I will come to you. For I hope to see you on my journey, and to be helped on my way there by you, if first I may enjoy your company for a while.
A ka' yu', a tuu woweèe aè rla' Bátáèláèháêm, a laa enáê, “Duè neè du roo muu anaè boèñboñ, weâe roèo yá ye, weèe gee tá m rïîñ, tá m bo duè caè'ni ye foñ.”	"He sent them to Bethlehem, and said, ""Go and search diligently for the young child. When you have found him, bring me word, so that I also may come and worship him."""
Muu ca à kùʼ sê.	This child is very fat.
Beèe ce a m ba, a yá yuu ce yi m koni neè ñwáè ca ba ñkuânyaèm ca a m suñ neè beèe anaè.	Those who saw it declared to them how it happened to him who was possessed by demons, and about the pigs.
Jus a ká' a ce de'ñger njobeè' Jisoès aè m laèa enáê, “A máè byee ce vi suèu embe buèu.”	"The Jews therefore murmured concerning him, because he said, ""I am the bread which came down out of heaven."""
Mbʉ yèe yu mbeer.	Your goat is red.
Baná m be bepsi yaè buu wááwá njo' weèe, fa yaè nyor foñ neè weèe neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè. M ka' koñ weèe goèr aèmboè m koèñ naè, weèe koñ ye máè múcaèr a?	I will most gladly spend and be spent for your souls. If I love you more abundantly, am I loved the less?
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' entombïì weèe aè ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe ca, njáèá mkwaè'shïì aè rgeèe buu ca mi túr ñger mbe weâe nduè.	You also once walked in those, when you lived in them;
Yuu ce a m laèa, yi m boèñ beèe wááwá, woweèe a ce Stáfaèn ce e m byemi seê, a ker ruusi neè Yú' Rara, ba Feleêp, ba Pukoruès, ba Nikanoè, ba Timúèn, ba Pámánaès, ba Nikoèlaès ñwáâ aè rla' Antïìyoèk, ce e m loè a byemi neè Nyúè beèe Juês.	These words pleased the whole multitude. They chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a proselyte of Antioch;
Baná yuu ce weèe aè ba geèe neè ñwáè anaè seè'ni yi yu ená weèe aè ba foèosi ye, fa ye ñger faè dïì' bsáè vi lo koo ye ka'.	so that on the contrary you should rather forgive him and comfort him, lest by any means such a one should be swallowed up with his excessive sorrow.
Nfʉr àa e ke gèe rnsùu sê.	My brother makes a lot of display of pride.
Ŋwɛɛ Msuu [ŋwɛ̄ː msūː] cn 7.	month of April.
Máèári aè du a yá Jisoès, a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a laa enáê, “Tataê, wáè mú ba aèfa, ndur yaè aè mú kwe ka'.”	"Therefore when Mary came to where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, ""Lord, if you would have been here, my brother wouldn't have died."""
Pol aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè be sa' wer mnsa' ka', a lip weèr aè múèè beèe, a ku lor wer ce weèr yu beâe aè to' Rum a fa mbe shañ. Woweèe a ce roo seè'ni aè rfúr weèr embe shañ ba aè bsúèti njoká? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka'. Laèa neè tá woweèe a vú fúr weèr embo neè yap bo.”	"But Paul said to them, ""They have beaten us publicly, without a trial, men who are Romans, and have cast us into prison! Do they now release us secretly? No, most certainly, but let them come themselves and bring us out!"""
Mɛ̀ ba laa nè ye, e ku gee kàŋ moʼsir.	I spoke to him and he did it at once.
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Fa wáp ka' Máèári, njobeè' aè túr rboâñtu weèe Nyúè.	"The angel said to her, ""Don't be afraid, Mary, for you have found favor with God."
E m ker laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Baná m ce suñ weèe máná mluè mi fa ce koo weèe neè yeè nyor ená weèe be ye ba ká ka', káè neè yeè nyor ená weèe be yar ba ká lá ka'.	"He said to his disciples, ""Therefore I tell you, don't be anxious for your life, what you will eat, nor yet for your body, what you will wear."
Suèusi neè wee mnyor njep nsheè aè bsii Tataê, tá e naa weèe mbekïì.	Humble yourselves in the sight of the Lord, and he will exalt you.
E ciisïì neè woweèe ená a fa suñ ñwáè moè' ená a ye Kraâis anaè ka'.	He commanded them that they should tell no one about him.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Maè'shi tá yi ba wa'a seè'ni na. Yi yu boèñboñ ená seèe gee ca tá seèe bo geèe buu wááwá ce vi yu yáánïì.” Joân aè byemïì.	"But Jesus, answering, said to him, ""Allow it now, for this is the fitting way for us to fulfill all righteousness."" Then he allowed him."
Pitaè aè du a yeâ mbuèu, a ba yi encaèñ. E du a ba' mbe cuèu mambe ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a niñ mbo, a cu aè nsheè a beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè, tá e bo yá yuu ce yi be ba.	But Peter followed him from a distance, to the court of the high priest, and entered in and sat with the officers, to see the end.
njobeè' le rbyemïì li be lúèsi neè rluèñ ce weèe ce keè' aè rkonïì naè.	receiving the result of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
Baná seèe yoñshi Nyúè aè rlii Jisoès. Liseèe ryoèñshïìì anaè li be ba aèmboè tañshïì ce seèe aè geèe neè Nyúè wa'a. Seèe yoñshi ye neè viseèe mnjeèndoñ aè njïû yáánïì.	Through him, then, let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, the fruit of lips which proclaim allegiance to his name.
Mɛ̀ saa blabaʼ ese ye.	I bought shoes from him on credit.
Wáè loèr yo yu ená aède' aè duñshïì mnfeèp nduunjïì. AÈ ce laèa wáná aè yu rraa neè beèe ce a yu aè túè'nji.	and are confident that you yourself are a guide of the blind, a light to those who are in darkness,
Josáèf aè du a yuu cáâ' boèñboñ, a suusi gúâú ñwáè embe kïìntaa, a kur neè cáè' anaè a lá njep rsheè ce a m soè' nje ryáá. A ka' láè a biñsi ma luèr a cete ncuèu rsheè aègho.	He bought a linen cloth, and taking him down, wound him in the linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb which had been cut out of a rock. He rolled a stone against the door of the tomb.
Yú' ce weèe aè m koni naè yu ba yú' ce yi geèe weèe aè ba bkwaèa tá weèe bo ce wáp buu ka', yu ba yú' ce yi geèe weèe aè ba ba boo Nyúè. Yú' anaè yi geèe seèe aè ce war neè Nyúè enáê, “Abaè, Yaè Taê.”	"For you didn't receive the spirit of bondage again to fear, but you received the Spirit of adoption, by whom we cry, ""Abba! Father!"""
Yu'ni neè neè beèe wááwá, koñ bfúr ce weèe woweèe yu ñgaâa rbyemïì, wáp Nyúè, yu'ni neè ñkúú.	Honor all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Honor the king.
Ñwáè wááwá be kuè kwe ba nfeè' moè'sir. E loè embenjïìmo tá Nyúè sa' ye.	Inasmuch as it is appointed for men to die once, and after this, judgment,
Ka' ba ená m yu' nyor baná m be yu' nyor ba aè buu ce vi duèñshi wa bgoè'sïì.	If I must boast, I will boast of the things that concern my weakness.
“Naèa neè mbúè mbaèa ce a ke maè' mbaâa baèraè' aègho.” Woweèe a vú neè mbúè mbaèa a fa neè ye, e laa enáê, “Tu ñwáè embo a yïû nda, rlii ce a sañ mbo aè ba lïû nda?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Tu embo a yi ñkwe Ruêm, rlii embo aè ba li foñ.”	"Show me a denarius. Whose image and inscription are on it?"" They answered, ""Caesar's."""
Nyúè viseèe btarkú aè m fúr Jisoès ce weèe aè m káèti mbe ce e kwe naè efa rkwe.	The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom you killed, hanging him on a tree.
Seèe fa moèoshi Tata aèmboè beèe mo' efa woweèe a m moèoshi naè ka'. Mnyo vi m tashi woweèe, woweèe a kweñgeèr.	Neither let us test the Lord, as some of them tested, and perished by the serpents.
Nfò ce bàŋbaŋ njo yaŋ muu zhìi.	Nfor is worried because of his childʼs illness.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu vïû Joân, a vúê, a yá ye a bipshi enáê, “Weèr beèe Farïìsi weèe e ke jïì mdip, geewa'a ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a ce jïì yap ka' njoká?”	"Then John's disciples came to him, saying, ""Why do we and the Pharisees fast often, but your disciples don't fast?"""
Boo waê, nfeè' ca yu lúèsimbuèu nfeè'. Weèe aè m yu' ená ñwáè ce e baèa Kraâis ce vúè. Beèe ce a baèa Kraâis a vúè seè'ni aè ku' ñgoo, baná seèe yi seè'ni ená nfeè' anaè aè gháá.	Little children, these are the end times, and as you heard that the Antichrist is coming, even now many antichrists have arisen. By this we know that it is the final hour.
To aè ku riñ mncir wááwá. Fa koo ñgwa ñwáè káè noèñ weèe nduu ñwáè ka', fa yú ñwáè ka', fa yáèá ka', fa táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ ka', yu'ni neè yoè ma ba yoè taê.”	"You know the commandments: 'Don't commit adultery,' 'Don't murder,' 'Don't steal,' 'Don't give false testimony,' 'Honor your father and your mother.'"""
Woweèe a m túr boo ka' njobeè' ÁÈlisabáèt aè m ba kar, woweèe a ker rúú seê.	But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren, and they both were well advanced in years.
Geewa'a, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “M be kuè feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè aè mla' mo' foñ njobeè' a yuu ce Nyúè aè tuu máè ená m vú geêe.”	"But he said to them, ""I must preach the good news of the Kingdom of God to the other cities also. For this reason I have been sent."""
Tata be caèasi nfeè' ka', e be sa' mnsa' ñgoèñ, teni.	"for He will finish the work and cut it short in righteousness, because the LORD will make a short work upon the earth."""
Weèr ce shooñger seè'ni njobeè' weèr ce koèñ se aè ryar ndap ce e yu mbe buèu naè aèmboè cáè' ce ñwáè aè yar aè nyoèr wa'a.	For most certainly in this we groan, longing to be clothed with our habitation which is from heaven;
Nyo à fʉʉ emba to lǒr.	The snake has come out of the hole freely.
Ŋgòŋ zhi yu myɛ̀ʼte sê.	The soil/ground is very muddy.
Weèr ce tuu nfúr moè' ená e du a Taitoès. Nfúr ca túr rlii rboèñboñ aè bcor wááwá njo' blaâa Nyúè ce e ce feè'shi.	We have sent together with him the brother whose praise in the Good News is known through all the assemblies.
Nyúè be keè laè' ñwáè wááwá aè buu wááwá ce ñgaèñ aè m geèe.	"who ""will pay back to everyone according to their works:"""
Ca yi ka' mïì wáá, Tata aè ce ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu moè', beèe ncoèp-baa-aè- msaèambaê, a tuu woweèe a baa a baa ená a du entombïì neè ye, du du aè mla' wááwá ker ba aè bdïì' wááwá ce e m ba aè rduè aèfo.	Now after these things, the Lord also appointed seventy others, and sent them two by two ahead of him into every city and place, where he was about to come.
A geèe ñwáè ce weèe aè yá a riñ na aè tap boèñboñ ba aè rbyemïì ce aè rlii Jisoès. AÈ ka' ba njo' rbyemïì ce aè rlii Jisoès, ñwáè ca aè tap boèñboñ a weâe bsii.	By faith in his name, his name has made this man strong, whom you see and know. Yes, the faith which is through him has given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
Woowèe a ce sɛr nsɛr.	They are debating.
Joân aè ce roèo njïì aè rkanïì, a laa enáê, “Yu ba wáè ce wáè ba baèptir máè, wáè vú wáná m baptir wáè aè njáâá ká?”	"But John would have hindered him, saying, ""I need to be baptized by you, and you come to me?"""
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Pitaè aè natïì a cañ a du faèdïì' ce rsheè li m ba, a ka' fyá' njo, a ku yá bcáè' ce a m kur ye njo naè aèmboè vi noèñte. E natïì a kúti, a ba neè rgha'nïì-ñwáè aè yuu ce yi m koni na.	But Peter got up and ran to the tomb. Stooping and looking in, he saw the strips of linen lying by themselves, and he departed to his home, wondering what had happened.
Baa kwâa zhi ke bòŋ à njàpsʉ̀ sê.	Corn fufu is usually very nice with vegetables.
Woweèe a be yá aèmboè rla' ca li ce yá ñgá', wáp, táá aènjïìsaèp laèa enáê, “Ndoèo! Ndoèo! Ma rla' rgoèr ce a too ená Babiloèn ce li túr ñger foñ se naè, li ce yá ñgá'. A ku lor ba nfeè' múcaèr, a teni wo mnsa'.”	standing far away for the fear of her torment, saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, Babylon, the strong city! For your judgment has come in one hour.'
Mboè weèe rïìñ weená aède' beèe ce a yu byáánïì ka' a niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka' a? Weèe fa bo' wee btu ka'. Rïìñ neè ená beèe ce a ce saèki ba beèe ce a ce loo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, ba beèe ce a ce koo bbyeèñge beèe mo', káè mmbañruè mo' áè, ba mmbañruè ce a ce koo mmbañruè mo',	Or don't you know that the unrighteous will not inherit the Kingdom of God? Don't be deceived. Neither the sexually immoral, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor male prostitutes, nor homosexuals,
Woweèe a yu ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ce mini ka'. Woweèe a yu ñgaâa ñkuèprïì ce a ce yááti foñ aèmboè ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraêis.	For such men are false apostles, deceitful workers, masquerading as Christ's apostles.
Saimún Pitaè ba ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu moè' a m duè aèmbuèu Jisoès aè nfeè' anaè. Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè m rïìñ ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès anaè. E niñ a Jisoès mbe mambe ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì anaè.	Simon Peter followed Jesus, as did another disciple. Now that disciple was known to the high priest, and entered in with Jesus into the court of the high priest;
AÈde' weèr ke laa nyúè moè' ená weèr yu aèmboè beèe ce a ce kwaè'shi ená a yu beâe bgoèrgoèr naè ka'. AÈde' weèr fe'nïì yer ñger aè yap ka'. Woweèe a ce feè'ni yap ñger fa waâp mú wa'a, baná woweèe a yu blúr.	For we are not bold to number or compare ourselves with some of those who commend themselves. But they themselves, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves with themselves, are without understanding.
Kaifaès aè m ce laèa wa'a, a ce laèa ba aè mkwaè'shïì mi ka'. AÈmboè Kaifaès ca aè m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè feè' anaè, e m suñ beèe yuu ce yi be loè ba. E m laèa ená Jisoès táá aè rkwe aètu to' wááwá.	Now he didn't say this of himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus would die for the nation,
Ñkaraè, fa beè'ni yuu bebep ka', beè'ni ba yuu boèñboñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yuu boèñboñ baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè Nyúè. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce gee yuu bebep, baná ñgaèñ aè m yá Nyúè ka'.	Beloved, don't imitate that which is evil, but that which is good. He who does good is of God. He who does evil hasn't seen God.
Wèr à yɛ ye kaʼ, banɛ e bii vʉ̀.	We havenʼt seen him, therefore he is yet to come.
AÈmboè weèr aè rïìñ seè'ni ená weèe táá tatap njep Tata na, weèr be cu seè'ni yáánïì.	For now we live, if you stand fast in the Lord.
AÈ be keè lu'shi, yu' rboèñ, tá beèe magoèr a lu'shi foñ, aè nfeè' ce a bi muu anaè,	You will have joy and gladness; and many will rejoice at his birth.
Yuu mo'sir yi yu ená yeè ndeèe ba le rcu li ku ba yáánïì aèmboè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ Jisoès ce roèo ená li ba, ka' máè ka' vú yá weèe, káè máè vúè ka' áè, m bo kuè yu' máná weèe táá tatap, a túr rkwaè'shïû rmo'sir, a ker ce reè neè ntee mo'sir tá Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce weèe aè byemi aègho bo duè kuèntombïì.	Only let your way of life be worthy of the Good News of Christ, that, whether I come and see you or am absent, I may hear of your state, that you stand firm in one spirit, with one soul striving for the faith of the Good News;
Fa fa bo kǒo kaʼ.	Donʼt put your hand inside.
Muunje ca bii ntùr.	This girl is still pre-mature.
Máè du a laa neè ncïìndap Nyúè anaè ená e fa máè ñwaè' anaè. E laa neè máè enáê, “Koè ye, aè be ye tá yi lee kuè cuèu aèmboè bluè wa'a, bep njep rbúè.”	"I went to the angel, telling him to give me the little book. He said to me, ""Take it, and eat it up. It will make your stomach bitter, but in your mouth it will be as sweet as honey."""
Sol aè m fa ñgá' neè cor seê. E m ce duè aè mndap jáá jáèá jáá ce koshi mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge ce fa mbe shañ.	But Saul ravaged the assembly, entering into every house, and dragged both men and women off to prison.
Ñwáè rsa' moè' aè m bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì ce mboèñmboñ, yuu ce aède' m gee ka' koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè yu ká?”	"A certain ruler asked him, saying, ""Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"""
Ñwáè anaè ka' ku bii nteèe, nlaè' rkwe anaè yi túr ñger ka'. Yi ku túr ñger ba aè nfeè' ce ñwáè anaè aè kwe.	For a will is in force where there has been death, for it is never in force while he who made it lives.
E m laèa enáê, “Weèr aè m laèa ená weèe fa yá'ni yuu mo' aè rlii ñwáè anaè ka'. Yá laè neè yuu ce weèe aè geèe. Weèe aè geèe le ryá'nïì li du aè mú bdïì' wááwá aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a koñ seè'ni aè rgeèe tá yi yááti ená beèe ce a m yú ñwáè ca aè m yú weèr.”	"saying, ""Didn't we strictly command you not to teach in this name? Behold, you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching, and intend to bring this man's blood on us."""
njobeè' Nyúè ku ba moè'sir caè'caè'. E be geèe Jus ce a ke geèe búè naè aèmboè beâe byáánïì, ce woweèe a ka' byemi neè Jisos Kraêis. Yi ku ba wa' foñ neè beèe ce a ke geèe búè ka' naè. Nyúè be geèe woweèe tá a ba byáánïì ce woweèe aè ka' byemi neè Jisos Kraêis.	since indeed there is one God who will justify the circumcised by faith, and the uncircumcised through faith.
Beèe a lapnïì goèr seê, tu yïû goèr yi wáp ená a be koo Pol saèsi. E laa neè bsoogáè ená woweèe a du koo ye aè ñger niñ aègho mbe barakïì.	When a great argument arose, the commanding officer, fearing that Paul would be torn in pieces by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him by force from among them, and bring him into the barracks.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' entombïì e ba yuu cicïì neè wáè; seè'ni e yu lulu neè wáè ker ba neè máè foñ.	who once was useless to you, but now is useful to you and to me.
Caè'ni neè bfúr ce aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè neè máè, ker ca'ni Nimfaè ba beèe ce a ke niñ cor mbe yeâ ndaèp naè foñ.	Greet the brothers who are in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the assembly that is in his house.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce mnfeèp ce weèe ce duèñshi beèe nduunjïì. Weèe ce laèa weená ñwáè aè ka' ye leè', kaa aè rlii Ndap Nyúè, yïì anaè ba yuu ka'; ñwáè aè ka' ye leè', kaa ba aè rlii buu embe Ndaèp Nyúè ce a geèe neè njáèá bco' mo' ce a too ená guêl, baná leè' anaè yi kur ñgaèñ.	"Woe to you, you blind guides, who say, 'Whoever swears by the temple, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gold of the temple, he is obligated.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	17	Weèe ce weèe yu blúr, a ba mnfeèp, yuu ce yi yu goèr yu ba yïû fá? Yu ba buu embe Ndaèp Nyúè ce a geèe neè gul káè yu ba Ndap Nyúè ce e geèe buu ca aè ba buu Nyúè?	You blind fools! For which is greater, the gold, or the temple that sanctifies the gold?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	18	Weèe ce laèa foñ ená ñwáè aè ka' ye leè', kaa aè rlii dïû' ntoèo rfa, yïì anaè ba yuu ka'; ñwáè aè ka' ye leè', kaa ba aè rlii rfa embe dïû' ntoèo rfa, leè' anaè yi kur ye.	Whoever swears by the altar, it is nothing; but whoever swears by the gift that is on it, he is obligated?'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	19	Weèe yu mnfeèp ghup. Yuu ce yi yu goèr yu ba yïû fá? Yu ba rfa káè yu ba dïû' ntoèo rfa ce yi geèe rfa li ba yuu Nyúè?	You blind fools! For which is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	20	Baná ñwáè ce e ka' ye leè', kaa aè rlii dïû' ntoèo rfa baná e kaèa aè rlii dïû' ntoèo rfa ba aè rlii buu embo.	He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it, and by everything on it.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	21	Ñwáè aè ka' ye leè', kaa aè rlii Ndap Nyúè, baná e kaèa aè rlii Ndap Nyúè ba aè rlii ñwáè ce e ce cu mbo.	He who swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him who was living in it.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	22	Ñwáè ce e ka' ye leè', kaa aè rlii rbuu, baná e kaa aè rlii kaèbaèraè' Nyúè, ba aè rlii ñwáè ce e cu mbo.	He who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits on it.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	23	Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni. Wee ke fa ñgúè' moè'sir efa rrúú efa mú buu jáá jáèá jáá ce a ke láè njep njaèp. Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè loèr buu mncir Nyúè ce vi yu tatap a caa rfa anaè aètáèr. Buu anaè yu aè rgeèe ñgeâe mini, ba ñkoosimnse ker ba aè rba mini aè buu. Weèe aè ba geèe buu ca keèr geèe mmo' ca foñ.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint, dill, and cumin, and have left undone the weightier matters of the law: justice, mercy, and faith. But you ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone."
Ngur saʼ à watî.	The knife handle has broken.
faè dïì' yuu yi bo ba ce a taa weèe aètu mo ka', tá wee mntee vi ba brara. Geèe neè wa'a tá weèe bo ba boo Nyúè ce a túr faèa ka', a ce cu aè múè ñgaâa bsaèrbuu, a ce raa aè waâp mú aèmboè mkaèñsïì wa'a.	that you may become blameless and harmless, children of God without blemish in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom you are seen as lights in the world,
E ka' laèa wa'a, a mú' waêp bfee, tá woweèe a bo rïìñ buu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ce laèa.	Then he opened their minds, that they might understand the Scriptures.
AÈ ka' ba njo' Jisos Kraêis, Nyúè aè naa seèe mbekïì aèbee seèe woweèe, a gee seèe woweèe aè cu mbe buèu.	and raised us up with him, and made us to sit with him in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus,
AÈ ka' ba aè mmbomntaa Nyúè ekoâ, to' bïìi yi ku roèo fúú wááwá aè ryu' blaâa Nyúè.	The next Sabbath almost the whole city was gathered together to hear the word of God.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Be ba aè nfeè' ce weèe aè naèa Muu Ñwáè mbekïì tá weèe ka' rïìñ ená a máè ye, keèr rïìñ foñ ená m ce geèe yuu mo' a máâ ñger ka'. M ku ce laèa ba buu ce yaè Ta aè yá'ni máè.	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""When you have lifted up the Son of Man, then you will know that I am he, and I do nothing of myself, but as my Father taught me, I say these things."
AÈ m ba nyúè moè', Jisoès aè ce geèe rloo mimñgi', ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ba a ye. E bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Ku' beèe ce a ke vúè na, a ke laèa ená m yu nda?”	"It happened, as he was praying alone, that the disciples were with him, and he asked them, ""Who do the multitudes say that I am?"""
Weèe aè m ba aèmbo njeèe ce yi daè', aè ka' ba seè'ni weèe aè kútïì a ce duè ba aèmbuèu ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe ce e ce keè'ni weèe.	For you were going astray like sheep; but now have returned to the Shepherd and Overseer of your souls.
Máè suñ woweèe wo blaèa; ñgoèñ yi baèa woweèe njobeè' woweèe a yu beèe enjep ñgoèñ ka', aèmboè má máè yu ñwáè enjep ñgoèñ ka' naè.	I have given them your word. The world hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
M ce suñ wáè ená aè be kuè cu mbe shañ anaè caar, laè' yi mbaèa ce yi yu neè wáè wááwá ka' fúú embo.”	"I tell you, you will by no means get out of there, until you have paid the very last penny."""
Woweèe a ker bipshi neè ye enáê, “Baná a wáè nda? A wáè AÈlajaè a?” E beesïì enáê, “A máè AÈlajaè ka'.” Woweèe a ker bipshi enáê, “A wáè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè anaè a?” Joân aè kanïì.	"They asked him, ""What then? Are you Elijah?"" He said, ""I am not."" ""Are you the prophet?"" He answered, ""No."""
Woweèe wááwá a wáp, a ku'si Nyúè, a ce laèa enáê, “Ñwáâ ncep ntuu Nyúâ ñgoèr aè fúú efa seâe mú,” a ker ce laèa enáê, “Nyúè aè vúè aè rjaè' yïì beèe.”	"Fear took hold of all, and they glorified God, saying, ""A great prophet has arisen among us!"" and, ""God has visited his people!"""
E loʼ mɛ̀.	He has deceived me.
a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, koosimnse neè muu waè, njobeè' e ce gweè kaè', a ce yá ñgá' seê. E ke loè ku gwe njep mor, ba njep mdip.	"Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is epileptic, and suffers grievously; for he often falls into the fire, and often into the water.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	17	16	Máè ka' vúè neè ye, fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu, woweèe a moo aè rgeèe tá e ke'se laèr.”	So I brought him to your disciples, and they could not cure him."
Dïû' ntoèo nráèá yi m ba mbo, a yo' neè guêl. Ñkuèp leè' Nyúè aè m ba mbe rum anaè foñ. A m yo' ñkuèp anaè neè gul foñ. A m láè ntúñ ce a m geèe neè guêl, a lá manaè njo, a lá njep ñkuèp anaè. Mbaèñ Ároèn ce e m loè a saa mmbar, aè m ba njep ñkuèp anaè. Bluèr ce Nyúè aè m sañ leè' mbo naè vi m ba njo foñ.	having a golden altar of incense, and the ark of the covenant overlaid on all sides with gold, in which was a golden pot holding the manna, Aaron's rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant;
Ñwáè wááwá aè ká' a ce suñ yuu ce e be jepsi ye efa rduè ñkaè' anaè. Ñwáè entombïì aè laa enáê, ‘Máè yuu ñkúè, aè ba yïì ce m be kuè duè ba seè'ni na duè yá aèmboè ñkúè anaè yu. Duè laa neè ye ená ntee yi fa yañ lá ye ka'.’	"They all as one began to make excuses. ""The first said to him, 'I have bought a field, and I must go and see it. Please have me excused.'"
Mɛ ke ràasi bzhɛ̀ɛ kaʼ.	I donʼt tolerate theft.
Yi ka' ba ená beèe a be keè fúú efa rkwe ka', baná Jisoès Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe foñ ka'.	But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ been raised.
E too nráèá anaè, nje efa gho yi natïì a mloo aèbee embaè bo ncïìndap Nyúè, a ko' kuèntombïì neè Nyúè.	The smoke of the incense, with the prayers of the saints, went up before God out of the angel's hand.
nan	Now to him who is able to establish you according to my Good News and the preaching of Jesus Christ, according to the revelation of the mystery which has been kept secret through long ages,
M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè Timotïì ce e yu muu waè ce máè koèñ neè ya ntee-ñwáè. M ce loo máná Nyúè Taèr, ker ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê, túr wáè aè ntee boèñboñ, koosimnse neè wáè, fa wáè cumúnyañ.	to Timothy, my beloved child: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
Dù laa nè yee cùu e be yuʼ u.	Say it yourselves he will understand.
Jisoès aè m loo neè Nyúè aè nfeè' ce e m ba njep ñgoèñ na. E m loo wa'a a ce warñger a ce suèusi mñgoommir. E m loo neè Nyúè njobeè' Nyúè aè m túr ñger aè rjaè' ye efa rkwe. Nyúè aè m yu' li rloo njobeè' e m ce loo neè ryu'nïì-ñwáè.	He, in the days of his flesh, having offered up prayers and petitions with strong crying and tears to him who was able to save him from death, and having been heard for his godly fear,
Ma à dù mbà nduunjì muu à bar ye.	The mother was going down the road and the child pursued her.
Geewa'a, m ce lu'shi seè'ni, a ke' ce lu'shi njobeè' máè m geèe weèe aè koosïìmnse ka', m ce lu'shi njobeè' weèe aè m koosimnse wa'a, a kupse, a ma' yeè buu bbebep. Ñkoosimnse ce weèe aè m túr, yu njáèá ñkoosimnse ce Nyúè koèñ. Weèr aè m bepsi weèe bepsi ka' koo múcaèr.	I now rejoice, not that you were made sorry, but that you were made sorry to repentance. For you were made sorry in a godly way, that you might suffer loss by us in nothing.
AÈ m ba aè nyúè anaè aè mbuèuñkuèr, Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Seèe tuu neèñguu roè.”	"On that day, when evening had come, he said to them, ""Let's go over to the other side."""
Weèe aè ba riñ máè, weèe aè ba rïìñ yaè Ta foñ. Ká' e seè'ni na, weèe aè rïìñ ye, a ker yá ye foñ.”	"If you had known me, you would have known my Father also. From now on, you know him, and have seen him."""
Rboâñtu li be ba neè ñwáè rfaè' ce yïì masaè aè ka' kúti, yá aèmboè e ce geèe li rfaè' aè njáâá wa'a.	Blessed is that servant whom his lord will find doing so when he comes.
Yuu ce yi ka' fúú ku' mbe dïì' anaè aè ka' ku ba ba ñgúú ba msini, baná nshe anaè yu aè cicïì. Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná nfeè' aè gháá ce Nyúè be bepsi nshe anaè tá a too neè mor.	but if it bears thorns and thistles, it is rejected and near being cursed, whose end is to be burned.
AÈde' wáè ke' ba koosimnse foñ neè ñwáè rfaè' moè' ca aèmboè máè ba koosi neè wáè naè ka' a?’	Shouldn't you also have had mercy on your fellow servant, even as I had mercy on you?'
Yïì ce e m gweèñger mbe nshe mboèñmboñ táá aètu beèe ce a yu' nlaèa Nyúè, byemi, yi gee ñgúè, moè' ba mntaar, moè' ba mntuunfu, moè' ba rjeèe.”	"Those which were sown on the good ground are those who hear the word, and accept it, and bear fruit, some thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times."""
Cwaʼshi nyaʼ ca.	Pound these garden eggs lightly.
Viseèe bta a m ye manaè aè rïìñ aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, ‘Nyúè aè m fa woweèe byee ce vi m suèu embe buèu ená woweèe a ye.’ ”	"Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness. As it is written, 'He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.'"""
E m cïìisi neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená woweèe a fa suñ ñwáè moè' ená e yu Kraâis anaè ka'.	Then he commanded the disciples that they should tell no one that he was Jesus the Christ.
Woweèe a ka' gee wa'a tá yi bo ba ená woweèe a kupshi buu ce vi be jaè' woweèe aè nfeè' ce e bii ka' vúè naè, a lá boèñboñ, tá woweèe a bo so ryoèñ ce yu ryoâñ mini.	laying up in store for themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may lay hold of eternal life.
E toshi mɛ̀ à tʉʼ.	He held me as a suspect for witchcraft.
“M yu gaây mboèñmboñ. Gaây mboèñmboñ e ke tami nyor aè rkwe njo' yi njeèe.	I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
Pol aè natïì mbekïì, a naa bo mbekïì a laa enáê, “Yaè beèe Isráèl ker ba weèe ce weèe ce wáp Nyúè, yu' neè yuu ce m be laèa.	"Paul stood up, and beckoning with his hand said, ""Men of Israel, and you who fear God, listen."
Túè' aè ka' raa, weèr aè ba' aè rla' Sidoèn. Julïìyoès aè gee ñgeâe boèñboñ neè Poêl. E m maè'shi ye e du a yá bkar vi tá woweèe a bo keè' aè ye.	The next day, we touched at Sidon. Julius treated Paul kindly, and gave him permission to go to his friends and refresh himself.
Waè' ñwáè moè' aè ba ker ba ce aède' e ba vú yoñshi Nyúè caa efa ñwáè nfuu ca ka' a?”	"Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this stranger?"""
Ñwáè ce e ka' gwe mbenduè luèr anaè baná ñgaèñ be ceeñger aè btete aè btete. Ñwáè ce luèr anaè aè ka' gwe mbe yeâ nduè, baná e be bú'shi ye.”	"Everyone who falls on that stone will be broken to pieces, but it will crush whomever it falls on to dust."""
Kʉ̀ mmbòʼ mbe ŋkàa jiŋ.	Harvest a basket full of pumpkins.
Njeñwáè moâ' aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè aè m vúè aè rtu' mdip. Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Fa máè mdip tá m no.”	"A woman of Samaria came to draw water. Jesus said to her, ""Give me a drink."""
Laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fa loèr yaèp nfeè' ce suñ ba mghaèghar káè ce naèshi ba bfúr ce baè' aèfo ka' ka'. Buu ca vi geèe beèe a ce sár ba mnsár a ke' ce jaè' beèe aè rrïìñ buu ce vi yu a kuu mfaè' Nyúè ka'. Beèe a ke rïìñ buu ca ba njobeè' woweèe a byemi yuu ce Nyúè aè laèa.	neither to pay attention to myths and endless genealogies, which cause disputes, rather than God's stewardship, which is in faith--
Mbàp yu mbà to.	The rat is inside the hole.
Geewa'a, keñ aè niñ njep múè nsaruñ yïì embe dïì' ce mdip mi m ce tarte a mmo', a táá. Cuâu keñ yi niñ njep múè nsaruñ anaè boèñboñ seê, a tañte njo. Mdip ce mi m ce bañti ce vúè neè ñger-ñwáè se naè, mi sa'sïì mbuèu keñ.	But coming to a place where two seas met, they ran the vessel aground. The bow struck and remained immovable, but the stern began to break up by the violence of the waves.
Kuushi ená Nyúè aè m loèr yïìseèe ta Abraèham aè ñwáâ nyáánïì a yeâ bsii njobeè' e m loèr muu yïû Aisïìk tá e bo tañshi tañshïì aègho neè Nyúè.	Wasn't Abraham our father justified by works, in that he offered up Isaac his son on the altar?
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè ñwáè ce e geèe búè ka', ñgaèñ aè ka' ce láè mncir Nyúè, baná Nyúè be kuè loèr ñgaèñ aèmbo ñwáè ce e geèe búè wáá wa'a.	If therefore the uncircumcised keep the ordinances of the law, won't his uncircumcision be accounted as circumcision?
njobeè' e kuushi máè ce m yu yïì ñwáè rfaè', ka' m yu ñwáè aè múè beèe ka' wa'a. Káâ' ntïìni na, ñgúè beèe wááwá enjep ñgoèñ a be ce too máè ená ñwáè rboâñtu,	for he has looked at the humble state of his handmaid. For behold, from now on, all generations will call me blessed.
Wèr à mʉ du ntaa nèŋkùr.	We went to market yesterday.
Jisoès aè m suñ buu ca wááwá neè beèe ce a m ba a woweèe, a ma' ba aè mñgaèa. Yuu mo' yi yu ce e m laèa neè woweèe a buu efa rmaè' ba aè ñgaèa ka'.	Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes; and without a parable, he didn't speak to them,
Ñwáè nya' mnde' a nda? Yu ba ñwáè ce e kani ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè ka'. Ñwáè anaè yu ñwáè ce e baèa Kraêis. E ce kani Taèr ba muu.	Who is the liar but he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the Antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.
Yi be ba wa'a njobeè' m be keè koosimnse neè woweèe, foèosi woweèe efa yaèp buu bbebep, keèr kuushi vi aè nfeè' moè' ka.”	"For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness. I will remember their sins and lawless deeds no more."""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Láè ye nyañ. Maè'shi tá e gee wa'a aè noèñ ce a be keè tuñ máè.	"But Jesus said, ""Leave her alone. She has kept this for the day of my burial."
Judaès ce e m fyeèni ye naè aè m suñ woweèe wáá enáê, “Ñwáè ce m ka' baa nje nyoèr, baná a ye; weèe koo.”	"Now he who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, ""Whoever I kiss, he is the one. Seize him."""
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe, ba bsoogáè ce a woweèe a m ce keè'ni Jisoès aè ka' yá aèmboè ñgoèñ yi cïì'ti, keèr yá buu ce vi koni, a wáp seê, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè m ba Muu Nyúè ghup.”	"Now the centurion, and those who were with him watching Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and the things that were done, feared exceedingly, saying, ""Truly this was the Son of God."""
Ca yi yu wa' njobeè' yuu mo' yi yu ce aètaè yi gha' Nyúè aè rgeèe ka'.”	"For everything spoken by God is possible."""
E ma'shïì woweèe, a niñ mbe keñ, a tuu neèñguu roè.	He left them, and again entering into the boat, departed to the other side.
AÈ m bár múcaèr e m ba kwe njo' rfaè' ce e m ce geèe neè Jisos Kraêis. E m tami nyor aè rkwe tá e bo jaè' máè a weâe btuè.	because for the work of Christ he came near to death, risking his life to supply that which was lacking in your service toward me.
Beèe moâ' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m laèa enáê, “Mboè ñwáè ca a ñwáè ce a roèo aè ryú naè a?	"Therefore some of them of Jerusalem said, ""Isn't this he whom they seek to kill?"
Ŋwàʼ Gàsàʼ zhi tap à rbèʼ sê.	The Koran is very difficult to read.
E ká' ese aè nfeè' anaè a ce roèo nduunjïì aè rfyeèni Jisoès.	From that time he sought opportunity to betray him.
Beèe a m ruu magoèr, nduunjïì yi ke' ba neè woweèe aè rniñ neè ñwáè ca mbo ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a ko' neè ye mbe tu ndap, a co'ni dïì' mo' embo, a suusi ye mbe keèñ caè mbe múè beèe embe ndaèp, a lá njeptii Jisoès.	Not finding a way to bring him in because of the multitude, they went up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his cot into the midst before Jesus.
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' ke ká' rlii Tata ená e ja' ye, a ñwáè ce e be keè luèñ.” ’	It will be, that whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved.'
Mrùʼ ca mi tap sê.	This wine is very alcoholic.
Jisoès aè naa bo a joo ye aègho, a laa enáê, “M ce koèñ wa'a, keè'se, ba nrara.” Ñwáè anaè aè ku ke'se aè nfeè' anaè, a ba nrara.	"Jesus stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, ""I want to. Be made clean."" Immediately his leprosy was cleansed."
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Le rbyemïì li yu ba fá?” Woweèe a wáp a ker bááñger foñ seê, a ce laèa fa waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu nda seê? E waa fu', yi yu'nïì neè ye, rdip li yu'nïì neè ye foñ.”	"He said to them, ""Where is your faith?"" Being afraid they marveled, saying one to another, ""Who is this, then, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?"""
Cor yu nyor Jisos Kraêis, ce e geèe Jisoès aè misïì a ghááte, Jisoès ye ye aè gee buu ce vi yu aè bdïì' wááwá vi misïì a ghááte.	which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all.
Wáè m geèe Dávïìd ce e m ba yoè ñwáè rfaè' aè laa aè ñger Yú' Rara enáê, ‘Ntee yi m ce yañ beèe enje jáá njoká? Beèe a m ce roèo mkuèu beèe mo' aè cicïì njoká?	who by the mouth of your servant, David, said, 'Why do the nations rage, and the peoples plot a vain thing?
Máâ koèñ máná weèe wááwá laa njáèá bli ce weèe aè m be yá'ni ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, yi yu aèndeèe ená weèe cep ntuu Nyúè, neè ce ená weèe ku ce laa ba li ce weèe aè m be yá'ni ka'. Ñwáè ce e ce cep ntuu Nyúè aè caèa ñwáè ce e ce laèa li ce e m be yá'ni ka'. Ka' ba ená ñwáè moè' ce beesi buu ce ñwáè anaè aè laèa aè li ce e m be yá'ni ka' na, vi ka' ja' coêr.	Now I desire to have you all speak with other languages, but rather that you would prophesy. For he is greater who prophesies than he who speaks with other languages, unless he interprets, that the assembly may be built up.
Geèe neè ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe moè', koosimnse neè woweèe, foosi woweèe foñ aèmboè Nyúè aè m foèosi weèe njo' Jisos Kraâis naè.	And be kind to one another, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, just as God also in Christ forgave you.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yuu bebep baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè Sataèn njobeè' Sataèn aè m geèe yuu bebep efa rkáè'. Mbuèu ce Muu Nyúè aè m vúè aè m ba ená e bo búsi mfaè' Sataèn.	He who sins is of the devil, for the devil has been sinning from the beginning. To this end the Son of God was revealed, that he might destroy the works of the devil.
Kuushi neè njáèá ntee boèñboñ ce Tata Jisoès aè m túr. E m ba ñwáè bkuè', a lo a kúti ñwáè fuèp njo' weèe, tá yïì fuèp ca bo geèe tá weèe túr bkuè'.	For you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that, though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that you through his poverty might become rich.
E m byáè' yi kïìntaa, a woweèe a du aè dïì' mo' ce a m ce too ená Dïì' keèkeèp tu. A too dïì' anaè aè li Hibruè ená Golgotaè.	"He went out, bearing his cross, to the place called ""The Place of a Skull,"" which is called in Hebrew, ""Golgotha,"""
E m yá'ni wa'a aè bfeâ' bbaa. Yi ka' ba wa', beèe wááwá aè ñgoâñ Ásïìyaè, Juês, ba beèe enje jáá a yu' blaèa Tataê.	This continued for two years, so that all those who lived in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
Jus magoèr a m beè' ñwaè' anaè njobeè' faèdïì' ce a m taa Jisoès naè aè m ba aè waâa la'. A m sañ ñwaè' anaè aè li Hibruè, ba aè li Latïìn ker ba aè li Greêk.	Therefore many of the Jews read this title, for the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city; and it was written in Hebrew, in Latin, and in Greek.
E ku ce sìr mbena.	I have told him to go.
Ɛ̀no, e koʼ mboo.	Has the monkey climbed to tree?
Weèr ce sañ yi foñ neè wáè, AÈfiyaè ce aè yu njar yeèr, ker ba wáè ce AÈcipoès ce seèe aè reè bsïìp a rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ.	to the beloved Apphia, to Archippus, our fellow soldier, and to the assembly in your house:
Weèr wááwá aè gweñgeèr aè nsheè, máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ce laèa neè máè aè li Hibruè enáê, ‘Soêl, Soêl, AÈ ce fa máè ñgá' njoká? Wáè ka' yá luèr ku túú kuèu njo, baná yi be yañ ba wáè.’	When we had all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice saying to me in the Hebrew language, 'Saul, Saul, why are you persecuting me? It is hard for you to kick against the goads.'
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' weèe aè ce cu aè túè'nji, aè ka' ba seè'ni na, weèe aè ce cu ba aè rraa njobeè' weèe yu beèe Tata Jisoès. Geèe neè ñgeèe aèmboè beèe ce a ce cu aè rraa.	For you were once darkness, but are now light in the Lord. Walk as children of light,
Woweèe a ka' yu' ca, ntee yi bep woweèe seê, woweèe a ká' a ce ghaa a ce laèa enáê, “AÈtámïìs ce aè rla' Áfásoès yu nyúâ ñgoèr.”	"When they heard this they were filled with anger, and cried out, saying, ""Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"""
E m káè' embe mñwaè' ce Musïìs aè m sañ, a du mbe mñwaè' ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè wááwá a m sañ, a nashi buu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa aèmboè ye neè woweèe.	Beginning from Moses and from all the prophets, he explained to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself.
Seèe aè ka' cu bteèe, seèe ku ce yu' ba ese Tataê. Seèe aè ka' kwe, baná seèe ku ba ba mba yeâ mmboè. Baná káè seèe aè cu bteèe áè, káè seèe aè kwe áè, seèe ku ba ba mbaè mmbo Tataê.	For if we live, we live to the Lord. Or if we die, we die to the Lord. If therefore we live or die, we are the Lord's.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Yuu ce weèr túr ku ba bráâd taê, ba nca baa.”	"They told him, ""We only have here five loaves and two fish."""
Yu ba ñgaâa rbyemïì wááwá ce a rïìñ ená mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na yu ba buu bcicïì ka'. Geewa'a, beèe mo' a yu ce a m ce loo neè mnyúè ca, e loè ba aè nfeè' ce woweèe a ce ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè ca, a ku riñ yap ená byee anaè yu ba byee mnyúè. Woweèe a ce ye, yap ntee yi ce fa woweèe ñgá', woweèe a ce kwaè'shi ená woweèe a geèe yuu bebep.	However, that knowledge isn't in all men. But some, with consciousness of the idol until now, eat as of a thing sacrificed to an idol, and their conscience, being weak, is defiled.
Ŋgàʼ e ke dòo mutù bòŋboŋ sê.	Ngah drives very well.
Weèr aè m yá wáè ba aè se'ká, wáè ce yañ, káè a ba mbe shañ áè, weèr aè ca'ni wáè?’	When did we see you sick, or in prison, and come to you?'
Wá ke yu' rboèñ neè buu ce beèe a ke fa neè wáè, too neè mor vi she ji' naè ka'. Wá ke yu' rboèñ neè btañshïì ce beèe a ke geèe tá vi bo siñsi yaèp buu bbebep naè ka'	You had no pleasure in whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin.
Jisoès aè m ker laa buu neè woweèe aè mñgaèa. E m laèa enáê,	Jesus answered and spoke again in parables to them, saying,
Beèe wááwá ce a m yu' buu ce e m ce laèa, a m báèáñger aè ryu' aèmboè e m ce bipshi buu, a ker ce beèesi buu neè bfee-ñwáè.	All who heard him were amazed at his understanding and his answers.
Mi mmir mi yu aèmboè mcuèñ mor wa'a. E soèp mtaa kúú mbe yeâ tuè aèñgoo. A sañ rlii mo' a yeâ nyoèr, aè ku riñ ba ye a riñ rlii anaè.	His eyes are a flame of fire, and on his head are many crowns. He has names written and a name written which no one knows but he himself.
Nyúè aè m geèe ená ñgoèñ mo' ce weèr aè suñ weèe ená yi be vúè naè, be sa' ba bcïìndap Nyúè ka'.	For he didn't subject the world to come, of which we speak, to angels.
Pitaè aè ghashïì ye aè rkoo, a naa mbekïì, a ká' beèe Nyúè ker ba byepkúú, a fa ye neè woweèe nteèe.	He gave her his hand, and raised her up. Calling the saints and widows, he presented her alive.
Ka' máè túr ñger aè rlaèa ená weèe ja' máè wa'a, máè be laa wa' ka'. M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè weèe seè'ni wa'a, a ke' ce sañ tá weèe bo jaè' máè ka'. Ka' ba ená ñwáè moè' gee tá naèatu ce m ce naèa njobeè' m ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè a ke' ce koo buu ese weèe ka' naè, lo ba yuu cicïì, m boñlaèr kwe kwe.	But I have used none of these things, and I don't write these things that it may be done so in my case; for I would rather die, than that anyone should make my boasting void.
Rïìtu yi ce koo máè ená weèr aè m ba yer bgoè'sïì, a gee buu ca neè weèe ka'. Koosi neè mnse neè weèr aè buu ce weèr aè m geèe ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' túr yuu ce aède' e lip ñguèñ aègho, baná má máè túr yuu anaè foñ. M be lïìp ñguèñ aègho. M ku bii ce laèa aèmboè lúr.	I speak by way of disparagement, as though we had been weak. Yet however any is bold (I speak in foolishness), I am bold also.
Máè yá bkaèbaèraè', a yá beèe ce a m cu mbe bkaèbaèraè' anaè. A m fa beèe anaè ñger ená a sa' beèe. Máè yá myoèñ beèe ce a m ceeshi woweèe btu njobeè' woweèe a m ce suñ beèe ená woweèe a byemi neè Jisoès, a ker ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè naè. Beèe ca a beèe ce a m gú'shi neè nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè ka', a ker gú'shi neè blañ nyaèa anaè ka'. Woweèe a m kani foñ ená a fa fa woweèe ncoèo nyaèa anaè nje nsaèpsi káè aè boè ka'. Beèe ca a m kweñger, a fúú efa rkwe, a Jisos Kraâis weèe a sa' aèbee aè bfeè' ncúèkïì.	I saw thrones, and they sat on them, and judgment was given to them. I saw the souls of those who had been beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, and for the word of God, and such as didn't worship the beast nor his image, and didn't receive the mark on their forehead and on their hand. They lived, and reigned with Christ for a thousand years.
Weèe ce laèa weenáê, “Yi yu mini ená e ke vúè ba ntáèr neè weèr ka'. Yi ku ba ba ená e yu kwáèá. Weèr rïìñ ená e ye sá' efa weèr aè mú mnjïì mo'.”	But be it so, I did not myself burden you. But, being crafty, I caught you with deception.
Weèe ka' ku táá njo tatap, weèe luñ njo' nsuñ ca. Yi ka' tá ba wa' ka' baná weèe aè m byemi ba aè cicïì.	by which also you are saved, if you hold firmly the word which I preached to you--unless you believed in vain.
Jisoès aè vúê, a joo woweèe, a laa enáê, “Naèti neè mbekïì, weèe fa wáp ka'.”	"Jesus came and touched them and said, ""Get up, and don't be afraid."""
Ñwáè aè ka' loo yuu ese Nyúè, ñgaèñ byemi neè yi ntee-ñwáè ená Nyúè be fa ye yuu anaè. E loo, e fa tarni ka' njobeè' ñwáè aè ka' loo ce tarni, baná ñgaèñ yu aèmboè rdip goèr ce fu' yi caèa ce cïì' wa'a.	But let him ask in faith, without any doubting, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed.
Seèe aè ka' fa kwaèñ kuè cuâu nyaèabaèraè' tá e bo yu'ni neè seèe, aède' seèe gee e du aè dïì' seèe aè gwáá.	Indeed, we put bits into the horses' mouths so that they may obey us, and we guide their whole body.
A ke ce bbʉ̀ ba nè nlùu.	We usually catch tadpoles only in the dry season.
AÈ ka ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka' na, woweèe a laèa bebep kuu yuu wááwá ce woweèe a rïìñ ka' naè. Woweèe a yu aèmboè mnyaèa efa rïìñ ce vi ke geèe buu neè bfee-ñwáè ka' naè. Buu ce woweèe a ce geèe na, a buu ce vi ce bepsi woweèe, woweèe a ce bú aè cicïì.	But these speak evil of whatever things they don't know. What they understand naturally, like the creatures without reason, they are destroyed in these things.
E ka' be'ti nyor fyá' njep rsheè a ku yá bcáè' ce a m kur gúâú ñwáè aègho naè aèmboè vi noèñ njo, a ke' niñ njo ka'.	Stooping and looking in, he saw the linen cloths lying, yet he didn't enter in.
E ker laa enáê, “AÈde' m be'nïì kúú Nyúè ba aè káâ naè?	"Again he said, ""To what shall I compare the Kingdom of God?"
Weèe ce koèñ ba yïì efá? Weèe ce koèñ ená m vú ba neè ñgwaèa káè neè rkoèñnïì ba ntee bobor?	What do you want? Shall I come to you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of gentleness?
Yap nyúè'tu yi m feese nyúè'tu njeñwáè; map msoèñ mi feeseè msoèñ búrúè'.	They had hair like women's hair, and their teeth were like those of lions.
Pol aè ka' cu aè rla' Atáèns ce keè' Timotïì ba Silaès, a yá ku' blañ ce beâe aèfo a m ce loo neè vi ená a mnyúè. E ka' yá, nyor aè bep ye.	Now while Paul waited for them at Athens, his spirit was provoked within him as he saw the city full of idols.
Ñwáè ñger ce e túr buu bïìr yáánïì aè ka' ce keè'ni yïì ndap, baná yuu mo' embe yeâ ndaèp yi be duè aè yuu ka'.	"When the strong man, fully armed, guards his own dwelling, his goods are safe.
Luke	Luêk	11	22	Geewa'a, ñwáè moè' ce e túr ñger a caa ye aè ka' koñge a ye, gha' ye, baná e be faèpshi yïì buu bïìr ce e m yá'ti yïì nyor njo naè, kwáè' buu embe ndaèp ñwáè anaè wááwá, gaèpshi neè beèe.	But when someone stronger attacks him and overcomes him, he takes from him his whole armor in which he trusted, and divides his spoils.
Luke	Luêk	11	23	Ñwáè ce e ka' tá ba weèr ye ka' baná ñgaèñ yu yaè ñwáè bbaèa. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá ce baashi weèr ye ka' baná ñgaèñ ce da'si da'si.	He that is not with me is against me. He who doesn't gather with me scatters."
M rïìñ máná nfeè' múcaèr tá Tata ma'shi tá má máè vú yá weèe.	But I trust in the Lord that I myself also will come shortly.
Yïì nsuñ aè du aè bbu' mla' wááwá aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè, beèe a vú neè beèe wááwá ce a m ce yañ byañ jáá jáèá jáá, ba beèe ce mnyor vi m ce yañ woweèe, ba beèe ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m ba njep woweèe, ba beèe ce a m ce gweè kaè', ker ba beèe ce mñgúè' nyor mo' vi m kweñger. Jisoès aè gee woweèe a ke'seèè.	The report about him went out into all Syria. They brought to him all who were sick, afflicted with various diseases and torments, possessed with demons, epileptics, and paralytics; and he healed them.
Weèe aè m ba byemi neè Musïìs, weèe aè ba byemi neè máè njobeè' Musïìs aè m sañ aèmboè máè.	For if you believed Moses, you would believe me; for he wrote about me.
E tʉʉ ŋkar zhìi njep nshè.	He has smashed his friend on the ground.
Jáms ba Joân ce ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a ka' yá ca, a laa enáê, “Tataê, aâ koèñ ená weèr laa tá mor yi suu embe buèu, toèo woweèe tá a kweñger a?”	"When his disciples, James and John, saw this, they said, ""Lord, do you want us to command fire to come down from the sky, and destroy them, just as Elijah did?"""
Ñwáè e ke byemi ba enjep ntee ka' ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, e ke laèa ba ekuè cuèu ka' luêñ.	For with the heart, one believes unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
A m boo ñka' ce yi m saèp seê, a sir rla' anaè aègho a tarte. Bcuèu efa ñka' anaè vi m ba ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú. Bcïìndap Nyúè ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú a m ce keè'ni bcuèu ñka' anaè. A m sañ mlii mntáâ' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúâú aè to' Isráèl aè bcuèu efa gho wááwá.	having a great and high wall; having twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels; and names written on them, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.
Bwer bvi yû.	This is your food.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce koèñ ená m gee ba ká neè wáè?” Nfeèp anaè aè beèesi neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, geèe tá m ker yá buu.”	"Jesus asked him, ""What do you want me to do for you?"" The blind man said to him, ""Rabboni, that I may see again."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, ñwáè moè' ce beèe wááwá a m rïìñ ye, aè ba mbe shañ. A m too ye ená Baèrabaès.	They had then a notable prisoner, called Barabbas.
Ndap anaè aè ka' ba ndap nyáánïì, weèe ma'shïì tá yeè cumúnyañ ba mbe ndaèp anaè. Ndap anaè aè ka' tá ba ndap nyáánïì ka', baná e bá bghoènïì anaè.	If the household is worthy, let your peace come on it, but if it isn't worthy, let your peace return to you.
Moè' efa woweèe ce a m ce too ená Kaifaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì mbe feè' anaè aè m naèti mbekïì a laa enáê, “Weèe rïìñ yuu ka' múcaèr ka'.	"But a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, ""You know nothing at all,"
Weèr rïìñ werná Nyúè ce e m fúr Tata Jisoès efa rkwe be fúr weèr ce weèr yu beèe Jisoès efa rkwe, loèr weèr, keèr loèr weèe foñ duè aègho, tár aè bsii Kraêis.	knowing that he who raised the Lord Jesus will raise us also with Jesus, and will present us with you.
tá a yú ye, mnoèñ vi ba btaar, tá e fúú efa rkwe.” E ka' laèa wa'a, yi bep woweèe seê.	"and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up."" They were exceedingly sorry."
Saèkaèriyaè aè ka' yá ye, mluè mi koo ye, e wáp seê.	Zacharias was troubled when he saw him, and fear fell upon him.
E kòŋ à ryɛ nzhɛ̀ɛ mbe zhǐi mambe kaʼ.	He doesn’t like to see a thief in hismàmi 102 maramuʼ 102 2-Limbum-English Dictionary-jb.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweñger aèwaâa nduunjïì táá aètu ñwáè ce e m yu' yuu ce a ce laèa aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a ke' yu' ka', Sataèn aè vú a fúr yuu anaè enjep yeâ ntee.	When anyone hears the word of the Kingdom, and doesn't understand it, the evil one comes, and snatches away that which has been sown in his heart. This is what was sown by the roadside.
E m cu aè ñgwañkúñwáè a ba' bfeè' ncoèp kyeèe-aè-mwaami. E m ce buu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè nfeè' moè' ka', ka' neètú' áè, ka' neèmootïì áè, e m ku ba mbo a ce jïì mdip, a ce geèe rloo neè Nyúè.	and she had been a widow for about eighty-four years), who didn't depart from the temple, worshipping with fastings and petitions night and day.
Ñwáè ka' fyáp rsoèñ bïìr aè nji, waè' aède' beèe a ba'shïì nyor du bïìr a?	For if the trumpet gave an uncertain sound, who would prepare himself for war?
E yu ñwáè ce a sañ aèmboè ye mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Yáê, m be tuu yaè ñwáè ntuu tá e du entombïì neè wáè, duè kupshi nduunjïì neè wáè.’	For this is he, of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.'
E rìŋ à rbii bii kaʼ koo mʉcàr.	Nfor is a very unskilled dancer.
Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ce duèñshi seèe njáèá njïì ce Nyúè e ke geèe beèe a ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii. Njáèá njïì anaè aè káè' neè rbyemïì, a misi neè rbyemïì. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' e byemi neè ye, ñgaèñ be luèñ.”	"For in it is revealed God's righteousness from faith to faith. As it is written, ""But the righteous shall live by faith."""
Byú' anaè vi m bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e fa laèa ená woweèe a fúú du njep beè'teè ñgá' ka'.	They begged him that he would not command them to go into the abyss.
Weèe aè ka' yá ñgá' aè mú nfeè' moè' wáá, tá Nyúè gee tá buu wááwá kúti ba yáánïì, keèr geèe tá weèe táá tatap ce cïì'ti ka'. Yu ye Nyúè ce bghoènïì wááwá vi loè ese ye, yu ye ce e m ká' weèe ená weèe bo koni bkuè' ce nfeseè njo' yuu ce Kraâis aè m geèe naè.	But may the God of all grace, who called you to his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after you have suffered a little while, perfect, establish, strengthen, and settle you.
E ka' duè baè', a niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a yá aèmboè beèe a ce fyeèni naè', ba njeèe, ba bbeèñ a ker yá aèmboè beèe a ce kupse mbaèa mbo.	He found in the temple those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves, and the changers of money sitting.
Koʼsi mɛ̀ bàa mbe tù.	Lift this bag and place on my head.
Bfúr waê, mbuèu moè' ker ba aègho neè weèr aè rsañ neè weèe aèmboè nfeè' káè noèñ ce Jisoès be vúè ka'.	But concerning the times and the seasons, brothers, you have no need that anything be written to you.
Máâ kuushi mñgoommir ce wáè m suèusi naè, a ce koèñ aè ryá wáè tá m bo lu'shi.	longing to see you, remembering your tears, that I may be filled with joy;
E gòʼ baa zhi yɛ̂r.	She ground fufu and it was smooth.
Bkwaèa ce wap mmasaè a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì naè a fa loèr wap mmasaè aètáèr njobeè' woweèe a yu bfúr enjep Jisos Kraâis ka'. Woweèe a ba faè' neè wap mmasaè anaè boèñboñ seê, njobeè' beèe ce a ce ye sá' efa lap rfaè' yu beèe ce a ku ba ñgaâa rbyemïì aèmboè woweèe, aè ba beèe ce woweèe a koèñ. Yá'ni beèe buu ca, cep woweèe tá a bo geèe vi.	Those who have believing masters, let them not despise them, because they are brothers, but rather let them serve them, because those who partake of the benefit are believing and beloved. Teach and exhort these things.
E m bipshi wa'a njobeè' e m rïìñ ená beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a m ce ko'-ndoñ neè Jisoès a ka' koo ye a vú aègho a fa neè ye.	For he perceived that for envy the chief priests had delivered him up.
A ka' ba njobeè' rkoèñnïì ce aè túr na, m be loo wáè loo. Kuushi wáná ce loo máè e loo wáè, máè ce Pol ce m yu nleeñwáè seè'ni, a ba mbe shañ aètu Jisos Kraêis.	yet for love's sake I rather beg, being such a one as Paul, the aged, but also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
M ce laèa neè weèe aèmboè lúr wa'a, aè gee ba weèe máè ka' ce laèa wa'a. Yi yu ená weèe aè ba ce yu' nyor neè máè njobeè' a ka' ba ce feè'ni máè weèr beèe ce a loèr wap btu aèmboè ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraâis ce a yu yap jáá naè, m ba ba mbe waâp njïì ka', ka' m yu yuu cicïì wa'a.	I have become foolish in boasting. You compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you, for in nothing was I inferior to the very best apostles, though I am nothing.
Beèe a m ce loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, ker ba aè mla' ce mi m ba aègee rdip Jodaèn, a ce duè ce yá ye.	Then people from Jerusalem, all of Judea, and all the region around the Jordan went out to him.
M be keèr cu njep ñgoèñ ka', woweèe a be kuè cu yap njo, tá m vú ya vúè yá wáè. Taèr ce nrara, keè'ni woweèe neè yo ñger ce wáè m fa neè máè foñ naè, tá woweèe a bo ba ñwáè moè'sir aèmboè soè yu naè.	I am no more in the world, but these are in the world, and I am coming to you. Holy Father, keep them through your name which you have given me, that they may be one, even as we are.
Tu yïû goèr yi m ce koèñ aè rrïìñ rara ená Jus ca a m ce laèa ená Pol aè geèe ba ká lá. Túè' aè ka' raa, e ba'shïì ye efa bshañ, a laa beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa kansuèr wááwá a vúseè. E vú neè Pol a tár mbe kansuèr.	But on the next day, desiring to know the truth about why he was accused by the Jews, he freed him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all the council to come together, and brought Paul down and set him before them.
tá weèe bo co' yuu ce yi boèñ a caa mo', e keè ba aè noèñ ce Kraâis be keèr vúè naè wee mntee vi bo ba brara tá yuu yi ke' ba ce e taa weèe aègho ka'.	so that you may approve the things that are excellent; that you may be sincere and without offense to the day of Christ;
a waa, a laa enáê, “Wáè túr rboâñtu a caa bbyeèñge wááwá. Nyúè aè ghoèni muu ce aè be bi anaè.	"She called out with a loud voice, and said, ""Blessed are you among women, and blessed is the fruit of your womb!"
E m láè mi mkaè'ni ce e m geèe, a ja' Isráèl ce e m ba yïì ñwáè rfaè'.	He has given help to Israel, his servant, that he might remember mercy,
A be fa ye mbe mmbo beèe enje jáá. Woweèe a be jaèasi ye, cáp ye, ce ye neè mce.	For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, will be mocked, treated shamefully, and spit on.
“Beèe ca a koni Yú' Rara aèmboè see seèe aè m koni naè. AÈde' ñwáè moè' kanïì ená a fa baèptir woweèe ka' a?”	Can any man forbid the water, that these who have received the Holy Spirit as well as we should not be baptized?
“Saimúèn, Saimúèn, yáê, Sataèn aè loo njïì aè rfyápshi weèe aèmboè aè ke fyápshi msañ naè.	"The Lord said, ""Simon, Simon, behold, Satan asked to have you, that he might sift you as wheat,"
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ce geèe buu ce e ke koèñ ba ñwáè aè rgeèe naè, mncir vi m ce naèashi viseèe mntee, seèe aè ce geèe buu bbebep, buu bbebep anaè aè lúsïì ba neè rkwe.	For when we were in the flesh, the sinful passions which were through the law, worked in our members to bring forth fruit to death.
Beèe anaè foñ a ka' kupse byemi, baná Nyúè be bar woweèe nje ce ca. E túr ñger aè rgeèe wa'a.	They also, if they don't continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
Baná m ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe bipshi tá a bo fa neè weèe. Roèo neè tá weèe bo yá. Kuèushi neè tá a bo múè' keèñ neè weèe.	"I tell you, keep asking, and it will be given you. Keep seeking, and you will find. Keep knocking, and it will be opened to you.
Luke	Luêk	11	10	Yi yu wa'a njobeè' ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' ce bipshi, baná e be koni. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce roèo, baná e be yá. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce kuèushi baná a be múè' keèñ neè ye.	For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.
Luke	Luêk	11	11	Yu ba njáèá tar muu ká efa weâe mú ce muu ka' loo nca, e fa ye ba nyo?	Which of you fathers, if your son asks for bread, will give him a stone? Or if he asks for a fish, he won't give him a snake instead of a fish, will he?"
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè aè ka' yá yuu ce yi m koni na, a ku'si Nyúè, a laa enáê, “Yi yu ghup ená ñwáè ca aè m ba ñwáâ nyáánïì.”	"When the centurion saw what was done, he glorified God, saying, ""Certainly this was a righteous man."""
Jisoès aè byemïì, byú' ca vi fúú enjep ñwáè ca, a niñ njep múè ñkuânyaèm. Ñkuânyaèm ce yi m ba aèmboè ncúèkïì baa yi káátïì a suu mbaè baa, a gweñger njep rdip rgoèr, a no mdip a kweñger.	At once Jesus gave them permission. The unclean spirits came out and entered into the pigs. The herd of about two thousand rushed down the steep bank into the sea, and they were drowned in the sea.
A ker niñ mbe nto' a Jisoès, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñwáè efá?” Jisoès aè laa yuu ka'.	"He entered into the Praetorium again, and said to Jesus, ""Where are you from?"" But Jesus gave him no answer."
Ñwáè moè' ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe aè m ba aèfo, a túr yïì ñwáè rfaè' ce e m koèñ seê, e ce yañ a táá yïû ñkwe.	A certain centurion's servant, who was dear to him, was sick and at the point of death.
Pitaè aè ye leè', a laa enáê, “M rïìñ ñwáè ce weâe laèa na ka'.”	"But he began to curse, and to swear, ""I don't know this man of whom you speak!"""
Weèr ce loo werná Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta ker ba Tata Jisos Kraêis, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you, and peace from God, our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Áfásoès enáê, ‘Cena yu ba blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáè ce e túr mkaèñsïì saèamba mbaè bo maè' a ce jáèr mbe múè mú btábuèr blam ce a geèe neè guêl.	To the angel of the assembly in Ephesus write: He who holds the seven stars in his right hand, he who walks among the seven golden lampstands says these things:
Cena yi m geèe yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Abraèham aè m ba ñwáâ nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' li rbyemïì,” naè yi ghááteè njo. A mbuèu ce a m ce too Abraèham enáê, “Ñkar Nyúè.”	"and the Scripture was fulfilled which says, ""Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him as righteousness;"" and he was called the friend of God."
Woweèe a ka' vúè baè' aètútú rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ba seè'ni ba aè rla' Bátáfáè ce li m ba aègee rtuèu Oleèf. Jisoès aè tuu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu beèe a mmbaa,	When they drew near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethsphage, to the Mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
E be vʉ̀ àbbo ca.	He will come within these days.
Beèe ce a m ba ená a be bipshi buu neè ye naè, a natïì a táá encaèñ. Tu yïû goèr foñ yi m loè a wáp aè nfeè' ce e m rïìñ ená e koo Pol ce yu ñwáè Ruêm, a kur.	Immediately those who were about to examine him departed from him, and the commanding officer also was afraid when he realized that he was a Roman, because he had bound him.
Tamfʉʼ à ba dû kù Bàmendà.	Tamfu went to Bamenda.
E laa enáê, ‘Máè kani. Weèe aè ka' ce co'ni ñke' anaè, seemoè' weèe co'nïì msañ aè múè mo.	"But he said, 'No, lest perhaps while you gather up the darnel weeds, you root up the wheat with them.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	30	Maè'shi neè tá msañ anaè ba ñke' a ku ce kuè' caar tá nfeè' ntee msañ gháá. Nfeè' anaè e gháá tá m laa neè ñgaâa ntee msañ enáê, “Káè' neè co'ni ñke', kur aè bbyáè' aè bbyáè', tá a toêo, baashi neè msañ, vú aègho lá njep caèñ.” ’ ”	Let both grow together until the harvest, and in the harvest time I will tell the reapers, First, gather up the darnel weeds, and bind them in bundles to burn them; but gather the wheat into my barn.""'"""
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' yuu mo' yi ker ce cete seèe mmir ka', baná rraa Nyúè ca li ce raa seèe aè nyoèr, seèe aè ce raa, a ká' a ce kupse, kuè ce kupse caar, loè ba foñ aèmboè Tata Jisoès, ba ñgaâa foèo aèmboè Kraâis yu naè. Cena yu ba rfaè' Tata ce e yu Yú'.	But we all, with unveiled face beholding as in a mirror the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory, even as from the Lord, the Spirit.
Beèe mo' a natïì mbekïì a nya' mnde' enáê,	Some stood up, and gave false testimony against him, saying,
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, ntee yi bu' máè se njobeè' máè m yá nfúr yaè ce Taitoès ka'. Máè ka' yá ye ka', a daasi woweèe a du aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè.	I had no relief for my spirit, because I didn't find Titus, my brother, but taking my leave of them, I went out into Macedonia.
Dávïìd ce too ye ená Tataê, baná aède' e ker ba muu yïì aè njáâá ká?” Beèe magoèr a m lu'shi aè ryu' cena.	"Therefore David himself calls him Lord, so how can he be his son?"" The common people heard him gladly."
Josáèf ce e m ba nduu yïì aè m ba ñwáâ nyáánïì, a ke' ce koèñ ená e coosi ye aè múè beèe ka', a ce kwaè'shi ená e be kwesi guèu tá ñwáè moè' riñ ka'.	Joseph, her husband, being a righteous man, and not willing to make her a public example, intended to put her away secretly.
Ñwáè Farïìsi ce e m be Jisoès naè, aè ka' yá ca, a laa neè yïì nyor enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè ba ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè, e ba rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce njeñwáè ce e ce joèo ye na yu, njobeè' e yu ñwáâ ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"Now when the Pharisee who had invited him saw it, he said to himself, ""This man, if he were a prophet, would have perceived who and what kind of woman this is who touches him, that she is a sinner."""
Bfúr waê, loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú túr ntee bebep, kani efa rfoèosi neè Nyúè, maè'shi Nyúè ka'. Kuushi neè ená Nyúè ca yu Nyúè ce e yu nteèe.	Beware, brothers, lest perhaps there be in any one of you an evil heart of unbelief, in falling away from the living God;
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñkaraè, geèe yuu ce wáè ba vú aèfa aè rgeèe.” Beèe anaè a vúê, a koo ye a ba'ni.	"Jesus said to him, ""Friend, why are you here?"" Then they came and laid hands on Jesus, and took him."
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáâ yá aèmboè ku' beèe a ce nyoèrni enáê, aè bipshïì wáná aè joèo nda wáè lá a?”	"His disciples said to him, ""You see the multitude pressing against you, and you say, 'Who touched me?'"""
Fuu à caŋ a niŋ mba mbùu bkuu.	The mouse has escaped and entered under the bed.
Yi ka' ba ená a m faèrshi mmba' mo' efa ce Oleèf ce a m byeè aè mñkúè, a lor weèe ce weèe yu ye mmba' ce Oleèf ce aè rïìñ a bar nje ce Oleèf ce aè mñkúè, weèe aè ce kuè' neè mdip enje nyoèr ce anaè,	But if some of the branches were broken off, and you, being a wild olive, were grafted in among them, and became partaker with them of the root and of the richness of the olive tree;
Maè'shi tá ñwáè ce e ce geèe buu bbebep ku ce geèe yïì buu bbebep anaè. Ñwáè ce e ce geèe bsaèrbuu ku ce geèe vi bsaèrbuu. Ñwáè ce e ce geèe ñgeâe yáánïì ku ce geèe yáánïì. Ñwáâ nrara ku cu aè ñwáâ nrara.”	"He who acts unjustly, let him act unjustly still. He who is filthy, let him be filthy still. He who is righteous, let him do righteousness still. He who is holy, let him be holy still."""
Ka' woweèe a rïìñ Nyúè wa'a, woweèe a ce kuè'si ye ka', a ker ce yoèñshi ye ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, bfee vi jep woweèe, woweèe a riñ yuu ka'.	Because, knowing God, they didn't glorify him as God, neither gave thanks, but became vain in their reasoning, and their senseless heart was darkened.
Rloo rli yuushì kaʼ.	I washed the caps.
Yaŋ muu zhi ce kèʼse.	The childʼs sickness is getting better.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' rkwe Jisos Kraêis, Nyúè aè gee seèe aè ba byáánïì, baná yi yu mini ghup ená Jisoès be jaè' seèe efa rshentee Nyúè foñ.	Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we will be saved from God's wrath through him.
Beèe Farïìsi a ker ká' ñwáè ce e m ba nfeèp naè, a laa neè ye enáê, “Laèa yuu ce Nyúè rïìñ enjo. Weèr rïìñ werná ñwáè ce e geèe wáè, wáè ce yá buu na yu ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"So they called the man who was blind a second time, and said to him, ""Give glory to God. We know that this man is a sinner."""
Yi ñgaâa mfaè' a ka' yááti foñ ba aèmboè beèe ce a ke faè' aè ryá ená beèe a geèe ñgeâe yáánïì naè, ker ba yuu báèá ka'. Yaèp ñgá' be loè kuè ba aèmboè map mfaè' mi m ba.	It is no great thing therefore if his servants also masquerade as servants of righteousness, whose end will be according to their works.
AÈde' yuu mo' yi gee m ker lu'shi caa aèmboè m ce lu'shi aè ryu' ená boo wa a ku cu njep mini na ka'.	I have no greater joy than this, to hear about my children walking in truth.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈde' beèe a laa ená Kraâis anaè yu muu Dávïìd aè njáâá ká,	"He said to them, ""Why do they say that the Christ is David's son?"
Jus a m báèáñger, a ce laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ca rïìñ buu wa' aè njáâá ká, ce e m be du ñwaè' mncir ka'?”	"The Jews therefore marveled, saying, ""How does this man know letters, having never been educated?"""
Baná weèe aè ba yu' yuu ce Yú' Rara yi laèa. Yi laèa enáê, “Weèe aè ka' yu' njeèndoñ Nyúè ntïìni,	"Therefore, even as the Holy Spirit says, ""Today if you will hear his voice,"
E m fa mfa ca tá beèe Nyúè a bo rïìñ aè rgeèe li rfaè', tá ñgaâa rbyemïì ce a yu nyor Jisos Kraâis naè a bo tap,	for the perfecting of the saints, to the work of serving, to the building up of the body of Christ;
weèe aè ka' ce laèa weená m ce laèa máná m yu Nyúè wa'a a ce bepsi rlii Nyúè bepsi njoká? Yu máè ce yaè Ta aè m ce a tuu njep ñgoèñ.	do you say of him whom the Father sanctified and sent into the world, 'You blaspheme,' because I said, 'I am the Son of God?'
Rgǒo rlii rli tap sê.	Her pride is very conspicuous.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè m geèe rfaâ' rmo'sir, weèe aè túr rgha'nïì.	"Jesus answered them, ""I did one work, and you all marvel because of it."
Woweèe a m ce ku'si rlii Nyúè njo' máè.	And they glorified God in me.
Weèe fa faè' ba aè rkoni byee ce vi be mïì ka'. Faè' neè ba aè rkoni byee ce vi be cu, fa ryoèñ ce nfeseè. A njáèá byee ce Muu Ñwáè be fa weèe. Nyúè ce e yu yaè Ta aè fa ye yïì ncoèo aè rduèñshi ená e yu muu yïì.”	"Don't work for the food which perishes, but for the food which remains to eternal life, which the Son of Man will give to you. For God the Father has sealed him."""
Koèniyuès a ke' ye ená ntuñ-ñ-ñ, a kaêñ, a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, yu ká?” E laa neè ye enáê, “Nyúè aè yu' lo rloo, a yá ená aè yu mmbo mtoo, a ce kuushi wáè.	"He, fastening his eyes on him, and being frightened, said, ""What is it, Lord?"" He said to him, ""Your prayers and your gifts to the needy have gone up for a memorial before God."
Ñger ce Joân aè m túr aè rbaèptir beèe naè yi m loè ba ese Nyúè káè ese beèe? Suñ aè neè máè.”	"the baptism of John, was it from heaven, or from men?"""
E ka' laèa wa' mïìsi, yuu mo' ce yi m ba aèmboè bbap nyor wa'a vi gweñgeèr ye enjep mmïìr njaè' moè'sir, e ker ká' a ce yá buu. E m naèti mbekïì, a baptïìr ye.	Immediately something like scales fell from his eyes, and he received his sight. He arose and was baptized.
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yá, a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Yeè ñwáè ryá'nïì ce ye buu a ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep njoká?”	"When the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, ""Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?"""
Weèe ca'ni wee mnyor, baani mnyor aè rduèñshi ená weèe koèñni. Tá weèe wááwá ce weèe yu beèe Kraêis, koni cumúnyañ.	Greet one another with a kiss of love. Peace be to you all who are in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Weèr aè caa a du aè ñgúè' moâ' aè rla' Kaèwudaè ce fu' yi m ce caèa ka', a gheter seê, tá keñ ñká' ce a m cúú mbaè mbuèu yïû ñgoèr anaè ka' bep ka'.	Running under the lee of a small island called Clauda, we were able, with difficulty, to secure the boat.
Beèe ce a ka' gee buu bbebep, baná a be lapni woweèe aèwañ tá bár a bo wáp.	Those who sin, reprove in the sight of all, that the rest also may be in fear.
Woowèe a ku bii kèʼse.	They are still awake.
Pitaè aè ka' jáèr aè mú bdïì' jáá jáèá jáá, a nati a du aè rla' Lidaè foñ, tá e bo yá beèe Nyúè ce a m ba aèfo.	It happened, as Peter went throughout all those parts, he came down also to the saints who lived at Lydda.
Buu ce vi loè ese Yú' Nyúè yu buu ca: rkoèñnïì, rlu'shïì, cumúnyañ, ñkur ntee, ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe, aè rba mini,	But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, patience, kindness, goodness, faith,
Nsuñ ca yu nsuñ ce Jisos Kraâis aè m ce máè ená m táá a yeâ tuè, suñ beèe, ka' m yu mbe shañ seè'ni wa'a. Loo neè ená m suñ beèe buu ca neè ñger-ñwáè, suñ vi aèmboè máè ba suñ.	for which I am an ambassador in chains; that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
Woowèe a mʉ koo mbàa a gap kaʼ a ku lɛ àmbommap.	They took the money and did not share, but kept it on their own.
Máè ka' yá máná woweèe a ce geèe ba yuu jáá efa yuu ce nsuñ mboèñmboñ ce laèa, máè laa neè Pitaè aè bsii beèe wááwá enáê, “AÈ yu ñwáè Juês, a ce cu aèmboè beèe enje jáá a ce cu naè. Wáè ka' ce taèa beèe enje jáá ená a geèe ba ndeèe Jus njoká?”	"But when I saw that they didn't walk uprightly according to the truth of the Good News, I said to Peter before them all, ""If you, being a Jew, live as the Gentiles do, and not as the Jews do, why do you compel the Gentiles to live as the Jews do?"
E ka' duè yá aèmboè a ce fa ñgá' neè moè' efa woweèe, e beenjïì nfúr yïì, a lip ñwáâ Ijïìp, e kweê.	Seeing one of them suffer wrong, he defended him, and avenged him who was oppressed, striking the Egyptian.
Wèr à ye baa àbsʉ̀ti.	We have eaten the fufu secretly.
‘Tata Nyúè aè m laèa neè Tata yaè enáê, “Cu aè la rkoo maè' caar tá m gee tá aè tár mo mkuèu mbenduè beèe ce a baèa wáè.”’	The Lord said to my Lord, sit on my right hand, until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet?'
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Fa wáp ka', Saèkaèriyaè, Nyúè aè yu' lo rloo. Ñgwa woâ ÁÈlisabáèt be bi wáè muu mbañruè. AÈ be fa rlii muu anaè ená Joân.	"But the angel said to him, ""Don't be afraid, Zacharias, because your request has been heard, and your wife, Elizabeth, will bear you a son, and you shall call his name John."
Lor rbyemǐ nè Nyʉ̀ li tap a?	Is your belief in God strong?
Jisoès a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a m ce duè aè bu' mla' ce mi m ba aè to' Sisaèriyaè Fïìlepaèï. A ka' duè baè' aè nduunjïì e bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Beèe a ce laèa ená m yu nda?”	"Jesus went out, with his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. On the way he asked his disciples, ""Who do men say that I am?"""
Dïì' mo' yi ker ba aègho neè máè seè'ni aè rfaè' aèfa ka'. Yu bfeè' aèñgoo se aèmboè máè m ce koñ aè rvúè caè'ni weèe.	but now, no longer having any place in these regions, and having these many years a longing to come to you,
Ŋwɛ̀ ca tèni sê.	This man is very courageous.
Bfúr wa ce máè koèñ seê, yi ka' ba wa'a, táá neè tatap, ke' ce ci'ti ka', ce fa' neè Tata Jisos Kraâis neè ye ntee-ñwáè aè nfeè' wááwá, njobeè' weèe rïìñ ená rfaè' ce weèe ce geèe neè Tata Jisos Kraâis li be keè bú aè cicïì ka'.	Therefore, my beloved brothers, be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Lord's work, because you know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.
E bàŋsi byuʼ.	She has stored bananas so that they can get ripe.
M ce loo máná Tata Jisoès túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Yuu tatap ce weèr ce laèa yi yu ená seèe túr tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce e ghááte neè seèe. E cu mbe buèu aè bo maè' kaèbaèraè' Nyúè ce e ke sa' li rsa' neè ñger-ñwáè.	Now in the things which we are saying, the main point is this. We have such a high priest, who sat down on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
Yuu ce yi yu goèr neè beèe ce Nyúè yu yaèp ñkúú yu ba buu bye ba buu mno ka'. Yuu ce yi yu goèr yu ba ñgeâe yáánïì ba cumúnyañ, ker ba rlu'shïì ce li loè ese Yú' Rara.	for the Kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit.
Ká' embe nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè ká' a ce feè'shi, a ce laèa enáê, “Kupse-neè, ma' yeè buu bbebep njobeè' nfeè' ce kúú Nyúè yi be káè', ce gháá.”	"From that time, Jesus began to preach, and to say, ""Repent! For the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand."""
Ñwáè aè ka' yu' wa blaèa, ke' gee yuu ce máè laèa ka', be sa' máè nsa' ñwáè anaè ka'. Máè m vúè tá m bo sa' beèe ka'. Máè m vúè tá m bo geèe beèe a luêñ.	If anyone listens to my sayings, and doesn't believe, I don't judge him. For I came not to judge the world, but to save the world.
E m laèa enáê, “Ntáè' Sábuloèn, ba ntáè' Naptaleè ce vi yu aè mbeèp rdip rgoèr, neèñguu rdip Jodaèn, ce vi yu aè ñgoâñ Galeèle yïì beèe enje jáá.	"The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, toward the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	4	16	Beèe ce a m cu aè túè'nji a yá ma rraa. Rraa li raa mbenduè beèe ce a ce cu aè ñgoâñ túè'nji ce e caèa ñger.”	the people who sat in darkness saw a great light, to those who sat in the region and shadow of death, to them light has dawned."
Jus a m beèe njïì Táètuloè, a laa ená buu ce e laèa vi yu mini.	The Jews also joined in the attack, affirming that these things were so.
Woweèe a ka' duè, a yá buu wááwá aè ku ba aèmboè Jisoès aè m suñ woweèe naè. Woweèe a fár byee ñkaè' anaè mbo.	His disciples went out, and came into the city, and found things as he had said to them, and they prepared the Passover.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jisoès aè ker kar aèwañ aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ka'. E m loè a du aè rla' mo' ce a too ená Áfráèm. Rla' anaè li yu aèwaâa rïìñ. E m duè a cu aèfo a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe.	Jesus therefore walked no more openly among the Jews, but departed from there into the country near the wilderness, to a city called Ephraim. He stayed there with his disciples.
weèe fa jaèasi ñwáè ce e ce suñ buu ce Yú' Rara yi geèe e riñ ka'.	Don't despise prophesies.
Mñgúè' nyor ce seèe ce kwaè'shi ená vi ku ba aè cicïì naè, a vïì ce see ke gá' aègho seê. Mñgúè' nyor ce see ke koèñ ená vi yááti aèwañ ka', a vïì ce see ke tá'shi boèñboñ.	Those parts of the body which we think to be less honorable, on those we bestow more abundant honor; and our unpresentable parts have more abundant propriety;
E m túr nfúr yïì moè' a ce too ená Máèári. Máèári ca aè cu njeptii Tata Jisoès a ce yu'shi buu ce e m ce laèa.	She had a sister called Mary, who also sat at Jesus' feet, and heard his word.
E ka' cu a woweèe aèmboè mnoèñ waami káè mnoèñ rúú wa'a, a nati a du aè rla' Sisaèriyaè. Túè' aè ka' raa, e niñ mbe kor aè rsa' mnsa', a laa ená a vú neè Poêl.	When he had stayed among them more than ten days, he went down to Caesarea, and on the next day he sat on the judgment seat, and commanded Paul to be brought.
E dù fàdìʼ moʼ.	He has gone somewhere.
Waè' m ce geèe wa'a njobeè' m koèñ weèe ka' a? Nyúè rïìñ ená m koèñ weèe.	Why? Because I don't love you? God knows.
E ka' laèa wa'a, Jisoès ye ye aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ku byemi ba njobeè' máè ba laa máná máè ba yá wáè aè nfeè' wáè ba cu njep mbuèu ce ce a too ená fik naè a? AÈ be yá buu mo' ce vi be caèa cena.”	"Jesus answered him, ""Because I told you, 'I saw you underneath the fig tree,' do you believe? You will see greater things than these!"""
E m laèa neè ñwáè moè' enáê, “Vúè a máâ mbuèu.” Ñwáè anaè aè beesïì enáê, “Tataê, beè ma'shi tá m du tuñ yaè ta wáá.”	"He said to another, ""Follow me!"" But he said, ""Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."""
Rbyemïì li m geèe bbyeèñge mo' a yá yaèp beèe moè' ce a m kweñger a lo a kúti bteèe. Beèe mo' a m yá mluè aè njáèá njïì ce ená a m fa ñgá' neè woweèe, a lip beèe mo' neè mmbaèñ, bvúp vi kepñgeèr, woweèe a kweñgeèr. Woweèe a m byemi ená a be beèesi njïì neè Nyúè tá a bo luèñ ka'. Woweèe a m geèe wa'a njobeè' woweèe a m rïìñ ená woweèe a be loè fúú efa rkwe, cu rcu ce li yu jáá.	Women received their dead by resurrection. Others were tortured, not accepting their deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection.
Pol aè natïì mbekïì mbe rcuteè embe AÈropagoès, a laa enáê, “Beâe aè rla' Atáèns! Máè yá boèñboñ máná weèe yu beèe ce weèe ce wáp mnyúè seê.	"Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus, and said, ""You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things."
Semòʼ e be fʉʉ vʉ̀ àyàŋsè.	Perhaps he will come tomorrow.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená, aè be ba weèe soè aè ñgoâñ Paraèdaêis ntïìni.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Assuredly I tell you, today you will be with me in Paradise."""
Baná yuu ce yi ghááte neè weèe aè rgeèe yi yu ená weèe lá ncir ce embe dïû' kúú Nyúè ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Koèñ nfúroè aèmboè wáè koèñ yoè nyor” naè.	"However, if you fulfill the royal law, according to the Scripture, ""You shall love your neighbor as yourself,"" you do well."
Tá beèe embe buèu wááwá a lu'shi njobeè' rla' Babiloèn li gweè. Tá beèe Nyúè wááwá, ba ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisoès, ker ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a lu'shi njobeè' Nyúè aè bepsi rla' ca njo' ñgá' ce li m ce fa neè woweèe.	Rejoice over her, O heaven, you saints, apostles, and prophets; for God has judged your judgment on her.
Wèr tʉr ndèe wèr woowèe mbà rò.	We have a boundary with them at the stream.
Baná m ce laèa neè weèe tatap seê, aè rlii Tata Jisoès ená weèe fa cu njáèá rcu ce beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ce cu naè ka'. Map mkwaè'shïì yu mkwaè'shïû cicïì.	This I say therefore, and testify in the Lord, that you no longer walk as the rest of the Gentiles also walk, in the futility of their mind,
M yu ñkwaèa neè ñwáè moè' ka'. Ka' m yu ñkwaèa neè ñwáè moè' ka' wa'a, máè geèe yaè nyor aèmboè ñkwaèa neè beèe wááwá tá m bo so beèe magoèr neè Jisos Kraêis.	For though I was free from all, I brought myself under bondage to all, that I might gain the more.
Bkúú ta efa múè bkúú saèamba ca a bii mbe kúú ka'. Ñkúú moè' ku bii sa', moè' aè ku bii vúè. E be vúè kuè sa' ba nfeè' múcaèr seê.	They are seven kings. Five have fallen, the one is, the other has not yet come. When he comes, he must continue a little while.
Yuu ce yi yu aètáèr a yïì efá? Yu ba aè rlaèa neè ñwáè yañ ca ená, ‘Máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep’, ká aè rlaèa ená, ‘Lo mbekïì, lor yo keèñ, jáêr.’?	Which is easier, to tell the paralytic, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Arise, and take up your bed, and walk?'
E m vúè wa' foñ tá beèe enje jáá a bo yá, ku'si Nyúè njo' yïì ñkoosimnse. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Baná m be suñ aèmboè wáè aè múè beèe enje jáá, yoèp byáá ce ku'si lo rlii aègho.”	"and that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy. As it is written, ""Therefore will I give praise to you among the Gentiles, and sing to your name."""
Blam vi be keèr raa aèfo ka. Mñkaè' bguèu vi be keèr ba aèfo ka'. AÈ m ba entoèmbïì ñgaâa ntaa ce aè rla' Babiloèn a ba beâe bgoèrgoèr njep ñgoèñ na, ma rla' anaè li ce bo' beâe aè bto' wááwá aè tú'.	The light of a lamp will shine no more at all in you. The voice of the bridegroom and of the bride will be heard no more at all in you; for your merchants were the princes of the earth; for with your sorcery all the nations were deceived.
Túè' moè' aè ka' keèr raa, Jisoès aè natïì ená e ce duè aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. E m roèo Feleêp, a yá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu.”	"On the next day, he was determined to go out into Galilee, and he found Philip. Jesus said to him, ""Follow me."""
E tuu beèe a mmbaa efa waâp mú a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè aè múè rla', weèe be baè' tá weèe tarte weèe mbañruèñwáè moè' ce e byáè' ntúñ mdip. Duè neè fa yeâ mbuèu,	"He sent two of his disciples, and said to them, ""Go into the city, and there you will meet a man carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him,"
‘A máè Nyúè wee btaê. A máè Nyúè Abraèham ba Aisïìk ba Jakoèp.’ Musïìs aè m kaèñ seê, a wáp aè rfyá'.	I am the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.' Moses trembled, and dared not look.
Weèe ce geèe buu wááwá boèñboñ. Weèe túr rbyemïì tatap. Weèe rïìñ aè rsuñ buu Nyúè, weèe túr bfee aè buu mini, weèe aè koèñ aè rjaè' beèe, weèe aè koèñ weèr. Baná weèr ce koèñ werná weèe gee rfaâ' rboèñboñ ca boèñboñ foñ.	But as you abound in everything, in faith, utterance, knowledge, all earnestness, and in your love to us, see that you also abound in this grace.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi mbenduè kaèbaèraè' nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè. E ka' cuè', túè' aè sii aè ñgoèñ wááwá ce nyaèa anaè aè m ce sa'. Beèe a m luushi mlee njo' mluè ce woweèe a m ce yá.	The fifth poured out his bowl on the throne of the beast, and his kingdom was darkened. They gnawed their tongues because of the pain,
Weèe aè ka' tá byemi yuu ce e m sañ ka', weèe ka' byemi yuu ce m ce laèa aè njáâá ká?”	"But if you don't believe his writings, how will you believe my words?"""
Woweèe a kur ye, a lor ye a du aègho, a fa neè Pailáèt ce e m ba govanoè.	and they bound him, and led him away, and delivered him up to Pontius Pilate, the governor.
Beèe moâ' aè ñgoâñ Ásïìyaè ce a m ba bkar Poêl, a m cep ntuu neè ye, a laa ená e fa moèo ka'.	Certain also of the Asiarchs, being his friends, sent to him and begged him not to venture into the theater.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe mkaè'ni neè Abraèham naè, ñwáè moè' aè m ker ba ce e caèa ye ce Nyúè ka'. AÈ ka' ba wa'a, e kaa ba aè li rlii ená e be geèe yuu ce e laèa.	For when God made a promise to Abraham, since he could swear by none greater, he swore by himself,
Yi yu rara ená nfeè' rlúèshïì ce beèe Nyúè a be lúèshi naè bii ka' ba. Nfeè' anaè be keè ba aèmboè noèñ ce Nyúè aè m geèe li rfaè' a ka' mïìsi wáá a lúshi naè.	There remains therefore a Sabbath rest for the people of God.
Gee ne wa'a, yi yu ená Nyúè aè m geèe mñgúè' nyor jáá jáèá jáá vi ce faè' buu jáá jáèá jáá aèmboè e m koèñ.	But now God has set the members, each one of them, in the body, just as he desired.
E m laèa neè woweèe ená aètaè a yar blaba', geewa'a, a fa yar bcáè' aè nyoâr bbaa ka'.	but to wear sandals, and not put on two tunics.
Woweèe a ka' duè aèmboè bkïìlomátaè ta duè baè' ntuunfu wa'a, a yá aèmboè Jisoès ce jáèr mbenduè rdip a ce vúè aègee keñ. Woweèe a ka' yá wa'a, a wáp seê.	When therefore they had rowed about twenty-five or thirty stadia, they saw Jesus walking on the sea, and drawing near to the boat; and they were afraid.
E kwa'shïì a laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘M be geèe má ká? M túr dïì' ce m be láè byee ca wááwá ka'.’	He reasoned within himself, saying, 'What will I do, because I don't have room to store my crops?'
Mɛ̀ jàʼ yaa tu.	I have helped myself.
E m ce máè ená m gee tá beèe wááwá a riñ buu ca, ce yu buu ce vi m ba tá ñgoèñ yi ka' keè ba. Nyúè ce e m geèe buu wááwá aè m kupshi buu ca a láê, beèe a riñ vi ka',	and to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery which for ages has been hidden in God, who created all things through Jesus Christ;
Jisoès aè m jáèr aè mú bbu' mla' wááwá aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a ce yá'ni beèe aè mndap mloo, a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a ce geèe beèe ce a m ce yañ byañ jáá jáèá jáá a ce keè'se.	Jesus went about in all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân a ka' yu' wa'a, a duê, a lor gúèú a tuñ, a du a suñ Jisoès.	His disciples came, and took the body, and buried it; and they went and told Jesus.
Jisoès aè m maè' ku' mñgaèa mo' aèmboè bca, a fe'shi nlaèa Nyúè neè woweèe aè ndeèe ce aède' woweèe a m ba yu'.	With many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it.
Naètanïìyáèl aè laa neè ye enáê, “Waè' aède' yuu boèñboñ yi fúú aè rla' Nasaráèt a?” Felep aè laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè yá.”	"Nathanael said to him, ""Can any good thing come out of Nazareth?"" Philip said to him, ""Come and see."""
Njeñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' anaè ce e m ba ñwáâ ñgeèe buu bbebep. E ka' yu' ená Jisoès ce yeñger mbe ndaèp ñwáè Farïìsi ca, a lor mú ntúñ bluèr ce njáèá mgúr mo' ce mi m ce rúèú boèñboñ seê, mi m ba njo,	Behold, a woman in the city who was a sinner, when she knew that he was reclining in the Pharisee's house, she brought an alabaster jar of ointment.
Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè bkaâañkoè' ce vi ke byeè buu ka', kep buu efa mñkúè ka', túr btaèp káè bcaèñ ka', geewa'a, Nyúè ku ce nyañ woweèe. Yeè ntaa aè luèu seê, a caa yïì bsiñ.	Consider the ravens: they don't sow, they don't reap, they have no warehouse or barn, and God feeds them. How much more valuable are you than birds!
Kyese aègee buu ca wááwá, ya ntáèr yu mkwaè'shïì ce m ce kwaè'shi aèmboè bcor wááwá aè mnoèñ wááwá.	Besides those things that are outside, there is that which presses on me daily, anxiety for all the assemblies.
E fa mɛ̀ cɛ̀ʼ, a kaʼ lò embenjìmo a ker koo.	He gave me a cloth and afterwards took it back.
Beèe anaè a koo Jisoès a ba'ni.	They laid their hands on him, and seized him.
Woweèe a ka' duè baè', a loo neè beèe anaè tá woweèe a bo koni Yú' Rara,	who, when they had come down, prayed for them, that they might receive the Holy Spirit;
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè vúè neè ñwáè ca ená e ce karsi btu ese beèe. Máè fyá' njep múè mo a weâe bsii, a yá máná e geèe yuu mo' efa buu ce weèe aè laèa ená e geèe na ka'.	"and said to them, ""You brought this man to me as one that perverts the people, and see, I have examined him before you, and found no basis for a charge against this man concerning those things of which you accuse him."
njobeè' e m yá'ni aèmboè ñwáè ce e m túr ñger, a ke' yá'ni aèmboè yaèp beèe ce a m ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir naè ka'.	for he taught them with authority, and not like the scribes.
Weèe koni bfúr wee aè ñgá' ce woweèe a ce yá. Weèe ka' gee wa'a, baná weèe aè láè ncir Jisos Kraêis.	Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mmbañruè ce a túr bbyeèñge ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì ka', ker ba bbyeèñge ce a túr bduu ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì ka', m be fa woweèe ncep. Ncep ca aè kwaè'shi ba máè, ke' ba ená aè fa Tata Nyúè ka'. Mbañruèñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka' túr ñgwa ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka', ñgwa yïì anaè ku koñ ená a ye a cu, e fa juèu ye ka'.	But to the rest I--not the Lord--say, if any brother has an unbelieving wife, and she is content to live with him, let him not leave her.
Ñwáè moè' aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Tataê, waè' ku ba ba beèe múcaèr ce a be keè luèñ a? E laa neè woweèe enáê,	"One said to him, ""Lord, are they few who are saved?"" He said to them,"
Nduunjì ca zhi yu duŋtè.	This road is uneven.
Weèe aè ka' gee njáèá rfaè' ca, baná weèe ce duèñshi beèe njáèá beèe ce weèe yu. Beèe a be yá, kuè'si Nyúè njobeè' weèe ku ce geèe ba buu ce weèe aè laèa aèmboè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ kuu Jisos Kraêis.	seeing that through the proof given by this service, they glorify God for the obedience of your confession to the Good News of Christ, and for the liberality of your contribution to them and to all;
Buu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè wááwá, a m sañ tá vi bo cep seèe, geèe tá seèe kur ntee, táá tatap ce keè' ba buu ce Nyúè aè kaè' neè seèe.	For whatever things were written before were written for our learning, that through patience and through encouragement of the Scriptures we might have hope.
wáè rïìñ yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ, a riñ yuu ce yi yu boèñboñ njobeè' a yá'ni wáè mncir Nyúè.	and know his will, and approve the things that are excellent, being instructed out of the law,
Tu zhi ce luu ye.	His has got a headache.
Ca yi ce duèñshi ená buu ce Nyúè e ke geèe vi yu yáánïì, njobeè' yi be geèe tá weèe ghááte aè beèe ce a be ye rboèñ embe dïû' kúú Nyúè. A mbuèu ce weèe ce yá ñgá' seè'ni.	This is an obvious sign of the righteous judgment of God, to the end that you may be counted worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which you also suffer.
Yu ya dïì' ená m fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe wááwá; m be feè'shi neè beèe Greêk, ba neè beèe ce a yu beèe Greâk ka', ker ba neè beèe ce a rïìñ ñwaè' ba beèe ce a rïìñ ñwaè' ka'.	I am debtor both to Greeks and to foreigners, both to the wise and to the foolish.
Sarmoèn aè m bi Buwaès ce yïì ma aè m ba Rahaèp, Buwaès aè bi Obáèd ce yïì ma aè m ba Ruêr, Obáèd aè bi Jáásïì.	Salmon became the father of Boaz by Rahab. Boaz became the father of Obed by Ruth. Obed became the father of Jesse.
Cena yi ka' mïì, Muu Njeèe aè naa nlaèadoñ yïì elúèsimbuèu efa vïû saèamba caè. E ka' naèa, ñgoèñ embe buèu yi noñ ená nyoèñ-ñ-ñ, yuu yi ce kaèra' ka' aè mú nfeè' moè'.	When he opened the seventh seal, there was silence in heaven for about half an hour.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená be keèe ba aè nfeè' ce a geèe buu wááwá vi kútïì bfi, a nfeè' ce Muu Ñwáè be keèe cu mbe kaèbaèraè' neè yi foèo embe buèu-ñwáè naè, tá weèe ce weèe aè vúè a máâ mbuèu na, cu mbe bkaèbaèraè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, ce sa' mntáè' Isráèl ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	"Jesus said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you that you who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of Man will sit on the throne of his glory, you also will sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."
A m vúè neè woweèe kuèntombïì neè ñgaâa nsa' mnsa' a laa enáê, “Beèe ca yu Juês. Woweèe a ce jepsi liseèe rla'.	"When they had brought them to the magistrates, they said, ""These men, being Jews, are agitating our city,"
A m duèñshi ryoèñ ca, weèr aè yáê, a ce suñ weèe aèmboè ryoèñ ca ce yu ryoèñ ce nfeseè ce li m ba a Taèr a duñshïì li neè weèr.	(and the life was revealed, and we have seen, and testify, and declare to you the life, the eternal life, which was with the Father, and was revealed to us);
M ker túr ya njeèe mo', yi ba mbe ñka' anaè ka'. M be kuè vúè neè njeèe anaè foñ mbe ñka' ca tá yi yu' yaè njeèndoñ, ba kúr e mo'sir, túr ñwáè rcïìñ moè'sir.	I have other sheep, which are not of this fold. I must bring them also, and they will hear my voice. They will become one flock with one shepherd.
Zhii shà zhi yu dòʼdòʼ.	Her corn beer is tasteless.
[Beèe wááwá a da'seè a duse aè mlaè'.	Everyone went to his own house,
Cena yu ba yaè ncep ce m ce fa neè weèe aèmboè buu ca. Yi boèñ ená weèe misi yuu ce weèe aè m káè' ha' ñgaèani naè seè'ni na. Weèe aè m ba beèe entombïì, a ke' ku ba ba beèe entombïì aè rfa caè'caè' ka', weèe aè m ba beèe entombïì ce a m káè' a tami nyor aè rfa.	I give a judgment in this: for this is expedient for you, who were the first to start a year ago, not only to do, but also to be willing.
Beèe Farïìsi a laa neè woweèe enáê, “A'a, a bo' weèe foñ a?	"The Pharisees therefore answered them, ""You aren't also led astray, are you?"
E beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñgúè beèe ce a yu ñgaâa bsaèrbuu, a ba mini neè Nyúè ka' na a ce laèa ená m duñshi woweèe ncoèo. M be duèñshi woweèe ncoèo moè' caa efa ncoèo yïì Jonaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ka'.	"But he answered them, ""An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, but no sign will be given it but the sign of Jonah the prophet."
Máè m ba a weâe mú, a go'sïî, a ce wáp buu, ntee yi ce kaèñ máè.	I was with you in weakness, in fear, and in much trembling.
a laa enáê, “Beèe a ke tar beèe, vú neè mruâ' mboèñmboñ entombïì, beèe a no yu' wáá, e ka' vú neè mïì ce mi boèñ goèr ka'. Wáè geèe yo jáá. Wáè loèr mruâ' mmboèñmboñ a tar beèe aègho ba aèlúèsimbuèu.”	"and said to him, ""Everyone serves the good wine first, and when the guests have drunk freely, then that which is worse. You have kept the good wine until now!"""
Ñwáè ce e ka' ye bráêd, ker no enjep ndoñ ca, ke' ce kuushi ená buu ca táá aètu nyor ba bláá Tata Jisoès ka', baná ñgaèñ aè loèr ndoèo mbe yeâ tuè.	For he who eats and drinks in an unworthy way eats and drinks judgment to himself, if he doesn't discern the Lord's body.
Naèti, suu njep nsheè. Fa wáp aè rduè weèe woweèe ka', njobeè' aè tuu máè a tuu woweèe.”	"But arise, get down, and go with them, doubting nothing; for I have sent them."""
A ka' lïìp woweèe boèñboñ, a fa woweèe mbe shañ, a laa neè ñwáè ce e m keè'ni shañ ená e ke'ni woweèe boèñboñ.	When they had laid many stripes on them, they threw them into prison, charging the jailer to keep them safely,
M ̀ be fʉ dù kù Nso àcii sundɛ.	I will go to Nso on Sunday.
Nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè aè ka' yá ená a maè' ye embe buèu, e gwe njep ñgoèñ, e ká' a ce juèu aèmbuèu njeñwáè ce e m bi muu mbañruè naè.	When the dragon saw that he was thrown down to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male child.
Ñwáè ka' kani yuu ce máè laèa na weèe kanïì vi blaèa foñ.	But if anyone is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
A mbuèu ce m ce tuu ye ená e vú yá weèe tá e bo suñ weèe aèmboè weèr yu tá ye ntee yi bo fúte tá weèe yu' rboèñ.	whom I have sent to you for this very purpose, that you may know our state, and that he may comfort your hearts.
Jáèrusaláèm, Jáèrusaláèm! Weèe ce weâe ke yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, ce túúshi beèe ce a tuu ená a vú yá weèe neè bluèr. Yu nfeè' sá' ce máè koèñ aè rbaashi boo wee aèmboè ma ñgúp e ke ku'ri boo naè, weèe aè koñ ka'.	"Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I wanted to gather your children together, like a hen gathers her own brood under her wings, and you refused!
Luke	Luêk	13	35	Yáê, a maè' yeè Ndap Nyúè e táá mboèmmbo. M ce suñ weèe máná weèe be keèr yá máè ka', caar tá nfeè' gháá ce weèe be laèa weenáê, ‘Nyúè ghoèni ñwáè ce e vúè aè rlii Tata Nyúè.’ ”	Behold, your house is left to you desolate. I tell you, you will not see me, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!'"
Baná aèmboè seèe yu boo Nyúè na, seèe fa keèr ce kwaè'shi ená Nyúè yu aèmboè blañ ce a loèr ba bco' káè bluèr áè, a gee aègho, aè ba yuu ce ñwáè aè geèe ba neè vi bfee ba mi mmbo naè ka'.	Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone, engraved by art and design of man.
Weèe ce weèe yu boo ce Nyúè koèñ seê, beè'ni neè gee ñgeèe ce Nyúè ce geèe.	Be therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.
Ñwáè moè' ce e m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès aè m ba aè rla' Daèmaskoès, li rlii li ba ená AÈnaèniyaès. Tata Jisoès aè m laèa neè ye aè rloo enáê, “AÈnaèniyaès.” E beesïì enáê, “Tataê, a máè na.”	"Now there was a certain disciple at Damascus named Ananias. The Lord said to him in a vision, ""Ananias!"" He said, ""Behold, it's me, Lord."""
Mbèŋ à waa ye.	The rain has stroke him.
Woweèe a koèñ aè rcu aè mnta' beâe bgoèrgoèr aè mñkaè', a koñ aè rcu aè mnta' bboèñboñ aè mndap mloo.	and love the place of honor at feasts, the best seats in the synagogues,
Seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu ñwáè moè'sir, ce seèe ka' ku táá tatap ba aè yuu ce seèe aè byemi naè du ba' aèlúèsimbuèu.	For we have become partakers of Christ, if we hold fast the beginning of our confidence firm to the end:
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená, tá Abraèham ka' keè ba, m ku ba.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Most certainly, I tell you, before Abraham came into existence, I AM."""
Ŋwɛ̀ ca tʉr bcɛ̀ʼ rʉ̂ʉ.	This person has ten clothes.
geewa'a, yuu mo' yi yu ce ñwáè aè ba túr. Máèári aè ce yuu boèñboñ ce a be keèr koo ese ye ka'.”	"but one thing is needed. Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her."""
“Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè yuu boèñboñ ce a súèti aè mñkúè, ñwáè moè' aè ka' vúè yá, a lor a súti foñ, a lu'shi seê, a duê, a fyeni yïì buu wááwá a yuu ñkúè anaè.	"Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man found, and hid. In his joy, he goes and sells all that he has, and buys that field.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	45	Kúú Nyúè yi yu foñ aèmboè ñwáè ntaa ce e m ce roèo sibañ,	Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a merchant seeking fine pearls,"
“AÈde' weèe ke' sa' neè wee btu, rïìñ yuu ce yi yu yáánïì ka' njoká?	Why don't you judge for yourselves what is right?
Máè yu' ma njeèndoñ aèmboè e suèu embe buèu a laa enáê, “Yeèr Nyúè aè geèe weèr aè luêñ. Ñger Nyúè ba kúú Nyúè yi yááti aèwañ. Beèe a yá ñger Kraâis ce Nyúè aè m tuusi njep ñgoèñ naè. A fúr ñwáè ce e m ce tee mnde' mbe btu bfúr viseèe aè nfeè' wááwá naè embe buèu, a ma' njep nsheè.	"I heard a loud voice in heaven, saying, ""Now is come the salvation, the power, and the Kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ; for the accuser of our brothers has been thrown down, who accuses them before our God day and night."
Ŋwɛ̀ ca ce bàŋ mmir nè mbàa.	This person is greedy for money.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba ñwáè Nyúè baná ñgaèñ be yu'shi blaâa Nyúè. Mbuèu ce weèe ce yu'shi blaâa Nyúè ka' yu njobeè' weèe yu beèe Nyúè ka'.”	"He who is of God hears the words of God. For this cause you don't hear, because you are not of God."""
E m loâ aè rla' Nasaráèt, a du a cu aè rla' Kaèpanuèm ce li m ba aèwaâa roè aè ñgoâñ Sábuloèn ba Naptaleè,	Leaving Nazareth, he came and lived in Capernaum, which is by the sea, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
Àfyoŋ ce càa mbekì.	The aeroplane is passing up in the sky.
E m túr boo bbyeèñge kyeèe ce a m ce cep ntuu Nyúè neè beèe. Boo ca a m duè bguèu ka'.	Now this man had four virgin daughters who prophesied.
Nyúè ce e ke fa ñgúè buu neè ñwáè rbyeè, ker fa yuu ye, be fa weèe ku' ñgúè buu, geèe tá ye ñgeâe boèñboñ yi fa sá' goèr.	Now may he who supplies seed to the sower and bread for food, supply and multiply your seed for sowing, and increase the fruits of your righteousness;
Beèe mo' a yu bkar njobeè' a m bi woweèe a ku ba bkar, beèe mo' a ba bkar njobeè' beèe a geèe woweèe a ba bkar. Beèe mo' a yu bkar njobeè' aè geèe woweèe a gee wap mnyor aè bkar njo' kúú Nyúè. Ñwáè ce aède' e byemïì yuu máè laèa na, ñgaèñ byemi yi.”	"For there are eunuchs who were born that way from their mother's womb, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men; and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heaven's sake. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it."""
Woowèe a mʉ coʼ ŋgàŋ nìŋkùr.	They casted out demonic objects yesterday.
AÈmboè yi yu na, baná seèe be geèe seeká? Woweèe a be buu efa ryu' ená weèe aè vúè ka'.	What then? The assembly must certainly meet, for they will hear that you have come.
“Yáê, m ce vúè seè'ni seè'ni. Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce geèe buu ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca.”	Behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè máè be riñ ye ka'. Geewa'a Nyúè ce e m tuu máè ená m vú baptir beèe aè m laèa neè máè wáá enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce aè be yá aèmboè Yú' yi be suèu embe buèu, cu mbe yeâ nduè, a ñwáè ce e be baèptir beèe neè Yú' Rara.’	I didn't recognize him, but he who sent me to baptize in water, he said to me, 'On whomever you will see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he who baptizes in the Holy Spirit.'
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e túr njáèá ntee ca, baná e túr aè rtañshi tañshïì aètu yïì buu bebep aèmboè e ke tañshi aètu buu bbebep beèe mo' naè.	Because of this, he must offer sacrifices for sins for the people, as well as for himself.
“Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu beâe aè rla' Koèrasïìn! Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu beâe aè rla' Báètsaidaè, njobeè' a m ba gee buu bghagha' ce a m geèe fa weâe mú naè ba aè rla' Tayaè ba aè rla' Sidoèn, beâe aèfo a m ba neè kupse e sese', a ma' bcáâ' njïì rkwe, a yo' bú aè nyoèr a cute aègho.	"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	22	M ce suñ weèe máná be keèe ba aè mnoèñ mnsa' tá ñgá' beâe aè rla' Tayaè ba Sidoèn ba yi aèndeèe neè yeè.	But I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon on the day of judgment than for you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	23	AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe ce aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, waè' a be ko'si weèe mbe buèu a? Yi yu wa' ka'. A be duè neè weèe ba mbaè yir, njobeè' a m ba gee buu bghagha' ce a m geèe neè weèe na ba aè rla' Sodoèm, rla' anaè li ba bii aègho gháá ntïìni.	You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, you will go down to Hades. For if the mighty works had been done in Sodom which were done in you, it would have remained until this day.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	24	M ce suñ weèe máná be keèe ba aè noèñ mnsa' tá ñgá' beâe a rla' Sodoèm ba aèndeèe neè yeè.”	But I tell you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom, on the day of judgment, than for you."
Jisoès aè ka' ce fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè, moè' efa ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, yá aèmboè bluèr ca ba mndaèp ca vi kuè'ñger naè.”	"As he went out of the temple, one of his disciples said to him, ""Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings!"""
Njeñwáè anaè aè vú a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a laa enáê. “Tataê, jaè' máè.”	"But she came and worshiped him, saying, ""Lord, help me."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè Jisoès aè natïû aè rla' Nasaráèt ce aè ñgoèñ Galeèleê, aè du a yá Joân, e baptïìr ye njep rdip Jodaèn.	It happened in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was baptized by John in the Jordan.
Vúè neè yá máè, weèe wááwá ce weèe ce faè' a byá' mntáèr vi ce rïìr weèe, tá m gee tá weèe lúshïî.	"Come to me, all you who labor and are heavily burdened, and I will give you rest.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	29	Loèr neè ya buè', taa ku weâe ndoñ, yá'ni neè buu ese máè njobeè' m yu ñwáâ múnyañ, a ba neè rbornïì-ñwáè, tá weèe bo koni nduunjïì aè rlúèshïì.	Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly in heart; and you will find rest for your souls.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	30	Ya buè' yi yu aètáèr, ya ntáèr yi ba fáfáp.”	For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light."
Mɛ̀ be du kaʼ.	I have not yet gone.
Wer ke loo neè Tata Nyúè wa'a ce kuushi njáèá rbyemïì ce weèe aè túr neè Jisos Kraêis, a ce faè' aègho. Wer ke loo wa'a ce kuushi mfaè' ce weèe ce geèe njo' le rbyemïì, ba le rkoèñnïì ce weèe túr neè Jisos Kraêis, a ker ce kuushi aèmboè weèe aè táá tatap a ce keè' nfeè' ce e be vúè.	remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and patience of hope in our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.
Wɛ̀ yuu cɛ̀ʼ anà à mbàa sɛʼ?	How much have you bought that cloth?
E yuu motò a ce yuʼnyor àgho sê.	He bought a car and is very proud with it.
Masà ca à cu àmbè sê.	This master has lived out of the tribe for a long time.
A Nyʉ̀ e ke yɛ̀r mbùu ngwe.	It is only God who cleanses a dogʼs anus.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe be túr ñger aè nfeè' ce Yú' Rara yi suèu mbe weâe nduè, tá weèe bo suñ beèe aèmboè máè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ba aè ñgoâñ Judaè wááwá, ba Saèmarïìyaè, ker ba aè mñgoèñ wááwá.”	"But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit has come upon you. You will be witnesses to me in Jerusalem, in all Judea and Samaria, and to the uttermost parts of the earth."""
Jisoès aè ka' yá aèmboè Naètanïìyáèl ce vúè aè ryá ye, e laa yuu a kuu ye. E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè Isráèl ghup, a ba ñwáè nlaèayá.”	"Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and said about him, ""Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit!"""
Máèári aè m cu a ÁÈlisabáèt aèmboè mñwáá btaar wa'a, a ka' kúti fa yeâ laè'.	Mary stayed with her about three months, and then returned to her house.
M ce koèñ aè rkuushi weèe buu moè' ce weèe aè m rïìñ wáá. Nyúè aè m jaè' beèe Isráèl a fúr woweâe aè to' Ijïìp. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, e m ku lo a yúshi beèe efa waâp mú ce a m byemi neè ye ka'.	Now I desire to remind you, though you already know this, that the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who didn't believe.
Gheèter neè niñ aè ncúèúndúè' ce yi yu yi'seè, njobeè' m ce suñ weèe máná beèe magoèr se a be gheèter aè rniñ, moèo laèr.	"Strive to enter in by the narrow door, for many, I tell you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.
Luke	Luêk	13	25	Ka' ba aè nfeè' ce ñwáè ndap aè naèti mbekïì a cete keèñ, a li', tá weèe táá ba njepmbeè ce kuèushi keèñ ce laèa weenáê, ‘Tataê, múè' keèñ neè weèr,’ tá e beesi yi yu enáê, ‘M rïìñ faèdïì' ce weèe ce vúè ka'.’	When once the master of the house has risen up, and has shut the door, and you begin to stand outside, and to knock at the door, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us!' then he will answer and tell you, 'I don't know you or where you come from.'
Luke	Luêk	13	26	Tá weèe ká' ce laèa weenáê, ‘To seèe aè m ce yeñger a ker ce noñger aèbee. Wáè m jáèr aè wer btase a ce yá'ni beèe.’	Then you will begin to say, 'We ate and drank in your presence, and you taught in our streets.'
Luke	Luêk	13	27	Weâe laèa wa'a, tá e beesi ená, ‘M rïìñ faèdïì' ce weèe ce vúè ka'. Loè neè efa máâ geñ wááwá, weèe ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.’	He will say, 'I tell you, I don't know where you come from. Depart from me, all you workers of iniquity.'
Luke	Luêk	13	28	Mwarseè mi be keè ba, tá mkúrmsoèñ ba aè nfeè' ce weèe aè yá Abraèham ba Aisïìk, ba Jakoèp, ker ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè wááwá mbe nto' Nyúè, a fúr yi weèe embo aè ñger naè.	There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the prophets, in the Kingdom of God, and yourselves being thrown outside.
Luke	Luêk	13	29	Beèe a be keè vúè ekuè mbuèuntii ba embaè mbuèuntii, ker ba ekuè tuñgoèñ ba embaè mbuèuñgoèñ wááwá cute tá a bo ye ñkaè' mbe nto' Nyúè.	They will come from the east, west, north, and south, and will sit down in the Kingdom of God.
Luke	Luêk	13	30	Be keè ba aè nfeè' anaè tá beèe mo' ce a yu beèe elúèsimbuèu seè'ni na, a ba beèe entombïì, tá beèe mo' ce a yu beèe entombïì seè'ni na, a ba beèe elúèsimbuèu.”	Behold, there are some who are last who will be first, and there are some who are first who will be last."
Boo waê, weèe yu beèe Nyúè, a so njáèá beèe ca njobeè' ñwáè ce e yu njep weèe aè caèa ñwáè ce e yu njep ñgoèñ.	You are of God, little children, and have overcome them; because greater is he who is in you than he who is in the world.
E m niñ mbe ndaèp rloo a ká' a ce laèa neè ñger-ñwáè seê. Preèsilaè ba AÈkwilaè a ka' yu', a lor ye a du aègho mbe waâp ndaèp, a nashi mnduunjïû Nyúè neè ye yáánïì seê.	He began to speak boldly in the synagogue. But when Priscilla and Aquila heard him, they took him aside, and explained to him the way of God more accurately.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis. Nyúè aè m ce máè ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisoès, a fúr máè ená m fe'shi yïì Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe.	Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the Good News of God,
Ñwáè Rjaè' ca yu Yú' ce yi ke suñ beèe yuu mini. AÈde' beèe enjep ñgoèñ a konïì Ñwáè Rjaè' anaè ka', njobeè' aède' woweèe a yá ye káè riñ ye ka'. Beèe ce a rïìñ ye yu weèe njobeè' e be cu weèe woweèe, ba njep weâe mntee.	the Spirit of truth, whom the world can't receive; for it doesn't see him, neither knows him. You know him, for he lives with you, and will be in you.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba, a too ye ená Saimúèn AÈ m ba ñwáè ce e m be ce geèe fii aè rla' Saèmarïìyaè, beâe aè to' anaè a ce báèáñger seê. E m ce geèe fii anaè a ce naèa nyor ená e yu ñwáè ñger.	But there was a certain man, Simon by name, who used to practice sorcery in the city, and amazed the people of Samaria, making himself out to be some great one,
M ce loo máná liseèe rtarshïû aèbee aèmboè ñgaâa rbyemïì li gee tá aè rïìñ boèñboñ aèmboè bghoènïì ce seèe aè koni aèmboè beèe Jisos Kraêis.	that the fellowship of your faith may become effective, in the knowledge of every good thing which is in us in Christ Jesus.
‘Nyúè ce laèa enáê, “Be ba aè mnoèñ elúèsimbuèu tá m fa ya yú' neè beèe wááwá, tá boo wee ce mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge, a cep ya ntuu neè beèe. Tá boo wee boo mnsuènsuèè a yá buu ce vi be loâ koni, tá bleebeèe a yá mlo.	It will be in the last days, says God, that I will pour out my Spirit on all flesh. Your sons and your daughters will prophesy. Your young men will see visions. Your old men will dream dreams.
Bcɛ̀ʼ ce bvi ce gweŋger na a bvisò.	The dresses that have fallen are ours.
Beèe mo' ce a woweèe a m cute a ce ye byee naè, a ká' a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “Njáèá ñwáè ce e ce foèosi beèe efa yaèp buu bbebep na a nda?”	"Those who sat at the table with him began to say to themselves, ""Who is this who even forgives sins?"""
Baʼshi buu lɛ njep bàa tɛ sò bo dù rjɛ̀r.	Prepare things and put in the bag so that we would go for a journey.
Máè mïìsi rfaè' ce wáè m fa neè máè ená m geêe, a ku'si wáè aègho njep ñgoèñ na.	I glorified you on the earth. I have accomplished the work which you have given me to do.
Ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe ce a m cute a sir tábuèr naè aè ka' yu' wa'a, a laa neè ye enáê, “Rboâñtu li yu neè ñwáè ce e be keè ye ñkaè' embe nto' Nyúè embe buèu.”	"When one of those who sat at the table with him heard these things, he said to him, ""Blessed is he who will feast in the Kingdom of God!"""
M ku koñ weèe foñ aèmboè yaè Ta koèñ máè. Cu neè njep la rkoèñnïì.	Even as the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Remain in my love.
Joân aè m suñ beèe ba yuu ce e m yá, a laa enáê, “Máè m yá aèmboè Yú' Rara yi ce suèu embe buèu aèmboè beèñ wa'a, a cu mbe yeâ nduè.	"John testified, saying, ""I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained on him."
Wàanî, àtà m̀ ker gee kaʼ.	I can never do it again.
M ce koèñ foñ ená bbyeèñge a yar buu aè njïû yáánïì tá vi ba yáánïì, keè' ba ba buu rñgoèo ka', keè' ba' ba tu rñgoèo ka', káè yar ba bsa' káè btee káè bcaèñ rñgoèo, káè bcáè' ce vi luèu ntaa ka'.	In the same way, that women also adorn themselves in decent clothing, with modesty and propriety; not just with braided hair, gold, pearls, or expensive clothing;
Moè' efa woweèe ce e m rïìñ mncir seê, aè mooshïì ye, a bipshi neè ye enáê,	One of them, a lawyer, asked him a question, testing him.
E be keè fa ñgá' neè ñwáè wááwá ce e ce geèe buu bbebep tá woweèe a yu' ryañ seê. E be keè káè' neè Juês, ka' du mbenduè beèe enje jáá foñ.	oppression and anguish, on every soul of man who works evil, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
Yi yu ená aède' ñwáè niñ mbe ndaèp ñwáè ñger kwá' yïì buu du aègho ka', ce ka' tá ba ená e ba ká' a kur ñwáè anaè wáá, ka' niñ mbo kwáè' yïì buu, duè aègho ka'?	Or how can one enter into the house of the strong man, and plunder his goods, unless he first bind the strong man? Then he will plunder his house.
Beèe Isráèl ce a m ce roèo yap aè rba byáánïì njo' mncir ce a m ce láè, a m moèo laèr.	but Israel, following after a law of righteousness, didn't arrive at the law of righteousness.
Fa leèse efa rgeèe yuu boèñboñ keèr gaèp yoè buu ce wáè túr neè beèe ka', njobeè' njáèá ñgeâe boèñboñ ca yi yu aèmboè njáèá tañshïì ce Nyúè koèñ se wa'a.	But don't forget to be doing good and sharing, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Máè ker fyá' a yu' njeèndoñ bcïìndap Nyúè ce a m ba aè mncúèkïì aè mncúèkïì. Bcïìndap Nyúè ca a sir kaèbaèraè' ba buu bteèe caè, ba beâe bgoèrgoèr caè a fa mbetar,	I saw, and I heard something like a voice of many angels around the throne, the living creatures, and the elders; and the number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands, and thousands of thousands;
Woowèe a dù mcʉ̀ʉni.	The have gone to confer together.
Ŋkàa cena a zhì nda?	Whose basket is this?
Sèe be bɛɛ njaŋ tâ.	We will plane five xylophones.
E m ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yu nda efa weèe ce e ka' túr ñkar yïì, ñkar yïì anaè vú yá ye neè ntee tú', laa neè ye enáê, ‘Ñkaraè, foèosi máè mntu' baa btaar,	"He said to them, ""Which of you, if you go to a friend at midnight, and tell him, 'Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,"
Mɛ̀ kòŋ ye kaʼ, e kaʼ tuu mɛ̀, mɛ̀ boŋlàr a dû.	I didnʼt like him, and when he sent me I went reluctantly.
Ncïìndap yïì embenjïì bcïìndap Nyúè vi bbaa ca aè laa neè njeèndoñ ntatap enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' gú'shi neè nyaèa ker ba blañ ca, byemi ená a fa ye ncoèo nje nsaèpsi káè mbe rkoo áè,	"Another angel, a third, followed them, saying with a great voice, ""If anyone worships the beast and his image, and receives a mark on his forehead, or on his hand,"
Yàa mâ à laashi war a lɛ bbʉ̀ njo.	My mother has cooked cow peas with tadpoles.
Weèr aè byemi neè wáè, a riñ seè'ni werná aè yu ñwáâ nrara ce e loè ese Nyúè.”	"We have come to believe and know that you are the Christ, the Son of the living God."""
M ce kuushi lo rbyemïì ce wáè byemi neè Jisoès neè yo ntee wááwá. Yoè makú Lowáès, ba yoè ma Yunïìs, a m túr njáèá rbyemïì ca. Máè rïìñ máná aè túr njáèá rbyemïì ca seè'ni.	having been reminded of the sincere faith that is in you; which lived first in your grandmother Lois, and your mother Eunice, and, I am persuaded, in you also.
Ncïìndap Nyúè yïì embenjïì aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, a lor yuu mo' ce yi m ce she a feese ma rtuèu, a ma' njep rdip rgoèr.	The second angel sounded, and something like a great burning mountain was thrown into the sea. One third of the sea became blood,
Weèr aè yá ñwáè ca aè ba ñwáè ñgá' seê. E ce teèesi btu ese Jus aè ñgoèñ wááwá, a ba tu mo' neè beèe ce a daè' enjep nduunjïì Nyúè ce a too ená Nasaráên.	For we have found this man to be a plague, an instigator of insurrections among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes.
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, to mnoèñ vi ku caa múcaèr seê, ce Jus a mú ce roèo aè rtúúshi wáè neè bluèr. Wáè ka' laa wáná aè be kúti aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè njoká?”	"The disciples told him, ""Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you, and are you going there again?"""
Yaa ŋwàʼ ce zhi mʉ bʉ nà zhi yɛti i.	My book which got missing has been seen.
Woweèe a m ce btu embe cor neè bcor wááwá aè mla' anaè, a ce loo ce jïì mdip, ce fa woweèe mbaè mmbo Tata ce woweèe a m byemi neè ye naè.	When they had appointed elders for them in every assembly, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they had believed.
Beèe wááwá a m ce gheèter aè rjoèo ye njobeè' woweèe a m rïìñ ená ñger yi m ce fúú ye enje nyoèr, a ce geèe beèe wááwá ce a m joèo ye a ce keè'se.	All the multitude sought to touch him, for power came out from him and healed them all.
Tɛr rnaaŋgòʼ anà àbgwàgwaŋ.	Place that grinding stone sideways.
Ñwáè anaè aè du a suñ Jus ená ñwáè ce e geèe ye e luñ aè geèe Jisoès.	The man went away, and told the Jews that it was Jesus who had made him well.
Bfúr waê, loo neè neè weèr.	Brothers, pray for us.
Sò be yɛni à ŋkʉr embe njì.	We shall see each other during the next round.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce a m bi Jisoès aè rla' Bátáèláèháêm, aè ñgoèñ Juèdiyaè aè nfeè' ce Hároèd aè m ba ñkúú, ñgaâa bfee mo' a lo ekuè mbuèuntii a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm,	Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of King Herod, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
Ntaa mgúr ce mi m ce rúèú boèñboñ aè ba aègho ka'. Ntaa mruè' ba ntaa mgúr aè ba aègho ka'. Ntaa kwaa aè ba aègho ka'. Ntaa nyaèa aèmboè naè' ba njeèe ba mnyaèabaèraè' aè ba aègho ka'. Ntaa mutuè mntaañguu aè ba aègho ka'. Ntaa bkwaèa ba beèe ce a m koo aè rkoèñ aè ker ba aègho ka'.	and cinnamon, incense, perfume, frankincense, wine, olive oil, fine flour, wheat, sheep, horses, chariots, and people's bodies and souls.
Woweèe a ka' laèa mïìsi, Jáms aè beesïì enáê, “Bfúr waê, yu' neè yuu ce m be laèa.	"After they were silent, James answered, ""Brothers, listen to me."
Pitaè aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Tataê, yi boèñ aèmboè seèe yu aèfa na. Maè'shi tá m ba'ri btaèp vi btaar, tá mo' ba yo, tá mo' ba yïû Musïìs, tá mo' ba yïû AÈlajaè.”	"Peter answered, and said to Jesus, ""Lord, it is good for us to be here. If you want, let's make three tents here: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah."""
Máè m sañ ñwaè' anaè neè weèe, a ce koosimnse, ntee yi ce fa máè ñgá', mñgoommir mi ce suèu máè ekuè tuè. Máè m ce sañ yi tá m bo geèe tá nyor bep weèe bep ka'. Máè m sañ yi tá weèe bo rïìñ ená m koèñ weèe seê.	For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote to you with many tears, not that you should be made sorry, but that you might know the love that I have so abundantly for you.
Tá beèe ce e koosimnse a cu aèmboè a ce koosi lá mnse ka' wa'a. Tá beèe ce a ce lu'shi a cu aèmboè beèe ce a ce lá lu'shi ka' wa'a. Tá beèe ce a yu ñgaâa ntaa a cu aèmboè beèe ce a túr lá buu ntaa ka' wa'a.	and those who weep, as though they didn't weep; and those who rejoice, as though they didn't rejoice; and those who buy, as though they didn't possess;
Mɛ̀ dù ŋkar nje làʼ nje Nyakò.	I went on a visit to Nyakoʼs house.
Lo rlir li ka' gee wáè aè gee yuu bebep, aè so'ni li enje tuè, ma'; yi yu aèndeèe ená aè ba ntoè' rlir, niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè neè ce aè túr mmir mmbaa tá a ke koo wáè, maè' njep mor.	If your eye causes you to stumble, cast it out. It is better for you to enter into the Kingdom of God with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire,
Bsoogáè foñ a m coosi ye. Woweèe a m vúè a fa ye mruè' ce mi ce bañshi,	The soldiers also mocked him, coming to him and offering him vinegar,
Bfúr waê, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe yu boo Nyúè njo' mkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m geèe, aèmboè a m bi Aisïìk aè muu Abraèham njo' mkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m geèe naè.	Now we, brothers, as Isaac was, are children of promise.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba yi ce a m ce too li rlii ená AÈnaèniyaès. E m túr ñgwa, rlii ñgwa yïì li ba ená Saèfereèyaè. A ñgwa a m fyeèni yap nsuu mo'.	But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira, his wife, sold a possession,
Seè'ni ce seèe bii aè rraa, seèe ku túr aè rgeèe ba mfaè' ce ñwáè ce e m tuu máè aè fa neè seèe ená seèe fa'. Túè' be loè sii, tá ñwáè ker faè' ka'.	I must work the works of him who sent me, while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work.
Weèe be rïìñ yuu mini, tá mini anaè gee tá weèe luêñ.”	"You will know the truth, and the truth will make you free."""
Mghoèo mi suu embe buèu a gweñger aènduè beèe. Rghoâo rmo'sir li m ce rïìr aèmboè baèa msañ wa'a. Ñgá' anaè aè m báámi seê. Beèe a m cáp Nyúè njobeè' ku' ñgá' ce woweèe a m ce yá.	Great hailstones, about the weight of a talent, came down out of the sky on people. People blasphemed God because of the plague of the hail, for this plague is exceedingly severe.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ka' yu' yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe na, a ce roèo nduunjïì aè ryú ye, a ker wáp njobeè' beèe wááwá a m túr rgha'nïì aèmboè li ryá'nïì.	The chief priests and the scribes heard it, and sought how they might destroy him. For they feared him, because all the multitude was astonished at his teaching.
Yuu ce yi yu tatap seê, yi yu ená weèe koñni neè mini-ñwáè njobeè' rkoèñnïì li ke tá'shi buu bbebep goèr.	And above all things be earnest in your love among yourselves, for love covers a multitude of sins.
A m sañ mbe yeâ tuè enáê, “A ñkúú Jus naè.”	"An inscription was also written over him in letters of Greek, Latin, and Hebrew: ""THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS."""
Nyʉ̀ kaʼ coo à cetè beʼŋgʉp.	Cover the fowls roost when the sun sets.
“Muu nlee aè m ba yi aè mñkúè aè nfeè' anaè, a ka' vúè baè' aètútú, a yu' aèmboè beèe a ce bu' mncuèu a ce bii bii.	"Now his elder son was in the field. As he came near to the house, he heard music and dancing.
Luke	Luêk	15	26	E ká' ñwáè rfaè' moè' a bipshi neè ye ená a ce geèe ba ká lá.	He called one of the servants to him, and asked what was going on.
Luke	Luêk	15	27	E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Nfúroè aè vúè, yoè ta aè fyá' naè' ce e ruusi, a sáá njobeè' e kúti a ku ba yáánïì.’	He said to him, 'Your brother has come, and your father has killed the fattened calf, because he has received him back safe and healthy.'
Luke	Luêk	15	28	Nyor aè bep muu nlee ca, e kanïì aè rniñ mbe ndaèp. Yïì ta aè fúú njepmbeè a boose ye ená e nïîñ.	But he was angry, and would not go in. Therefore his father came out, and begged him.
Luke	Luêk	15	29	E beesïì a laa neè yïì ta enáê, ‘Yáê, máè faè' neè wáè aèmboè ñkwaèa wa'a aè bfeè' aèñgoo, a be tee-tu neè wáè ka', koo múcaèr. Geewa'a, wáè m be fa máè ka' mú fuâu mbú ená m gee ñkaè' aègho neè bkar wa ka'.	But he answered his father, 'Behold, these many years I have served you, and I never disobeyed a commandment of yours, but you never gave me a goat, that I might celebrate with my friends.
Luke	Luêk	15	30	Muu woè ca aè koo bti', a ye a bkwaèraè weèe, a ker kúti, wáè koo naè' ce e ruusi a sáá neè ye.’	But when this, your son, came, who has devoured your living with prostitutes, you killed the fattened calf for him.'
Luke	Luêk	15	31	Taèr aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Muu waè, soè ku cu yi soè aèfa aè nfeè' wááwá, buu wááwá ce máè túr, a yoè buu.	He said to him, 'Son, you are always with me, and all that is mine is yours."
Ñwáè aè ka' lá mncir Nyúè wááwá, ku bú' ba mo'sir, baná e bú' mncir wááwá.	For whoever keeps the whole law, and yet stumbles in one point, he has become guilty of all.
Bfúr waê, m ce suñ weèe ená aède' njáèá nyor ce seèe túr na niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka'. AÈde' yuu ce yi ke kwe yi ye bti' yuu ce yi ke cu nfeseè ka'.	Now I say this, brothers, that flesh and blood can't inherit the Kingdom of God; neither does corruption inherit incorruption.
e niñ mbe ndaèp, weèe niñ mbo foñ, laa neè ñwáè ndap ená ñwáè ryá'nïì aè laèa enáê, ‘Dïì' ce m be ye Ñkaâ' caèasi mndap weèr ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu weèe yi yuê?’	"and wherever he enters in, tell the master of the house, 'The Teacher says, ""Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?""'"
Nyúè beèe Isráèl ca aè m ce viseèe btaê, a gee ñgúè yïìseèe beèe aè ku' aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ba bkïìloè aè to' Ijïìp. Nyúè aè m fúr woweâe aè to' anaè aè yi ñger,	The God of this people chose our fathers, and exalted the people when they stayed as aliens in the land of Egypt, and with an uplifted arm, he led them out of it.
Weèe beèe ca weèe e ke ye byee aèbee aèmboè beèe Nyúè, yap ñgeèe yi ce coosi weèe. E ke ba aè nfeè' anaè, woweèe a ku ce tá' ba wap btu, rïìtu yi ce koo woweèe ka'. Woweèe a yu aèmboè mmbaè' ce vi ke ko', fu' yi caèa lor du aègho, mbeèñ ke' gwe ka' naè. Woweèe a yu aèmboè bce ce nfeè' e ke gháá ce vi ba yú, vi yú ka', a co'nïì, vi kwe dúèdúè naè.	These are hidden rocky reefs in your love feasts when they feast with you, shepherds who without fear feed themselves; clouds without water, carried along by winds; autumn leaves without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots;
E laasi ŋgwa nfʉr zhìi.	He has inherited his brotherʼs wife.
a laa enáê, ‘Poêl, fa wáp ka'. AÈ be kuè táá aè bsii Sisaè. Nyúè aè túr wáè aè ntee boèñboñ, a ja' myoâñ beèe ce weèe woweèe yu mbe keñ na njo' wáè.’	saying, 'Don't be afraid, Paul. You must stand before Caesar. Behold, God has granted you all those who sail with you.'
Bsoogáè a ka' taa Jisoès mbe kïìntaa wáá, a lor vi bcáè' a gap bdïì' kyeèe, ñwáè aè lor vi, ñwáè aè lor vi. Yïì saèaro aè bátïì. Saèaro anaè aè m túr ntar ka'.	Then the soldiers, when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to every soldier a part; and also the coat. Now the coat was without seam, woven from the top throughout.
Baná buu ce vi ce suñ aèmboè ye vi yu vi btaar.	For there are three who testify:
Njeñwáè ce e m ce sa' to' embaè mbuèu-ñgoèñ be keèe naèti táá mbekïì aè noèñ mnsa', laèa ená ñgúè beèe e seè'ni na a geèe yuu bebep, njobeè' e m vúè yi ba aè njïìsaèp seê, aè ryu' blaâa bfee ce Solomúèn aè m ce laèa. Yá neè, yuu mo' yi yu mbena seè'ni na ce yi caèa Solomúèn.	The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, someone greater than Solomon is here.
Zhi bòŋ à rlɛʼsi ghàrŋwɛ̀ kaʼ.	It is not good to frighten a baby.
Njar yòo à dù ba fɛ?	Where has your sister gone?
Rkàŋsì rli ce raa embe bùu.	The star is shining from the sky.
Túè' aè ka' raa, Jus mo' a cuteè a ye leè' ená woweèe a ka' tá yú Pol ka' woweèe a ye yuu ka', ker no yuu ka'.	When it was day, some of the Jews banded together, and bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat nor drink until they had killed Paul.
Baná weèe fa ce nya' mnde' ka'. Ñwáè wááwá laa ba yuu mini neè nfúr yïì njobeè' seèe wááwá yu mñgúè' nyor efa nyor Jisos Kraêis.	Therefore, putting away falsehood, speak truth each one with his neighbor. For we are members of one another.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger aèwaâa nduunjïì naè, yu beèe ce a yu' nlaèa Nyúè, Sataèn ku vú fúr enjep waâp ntee.	The ones by the road are the ones where the word is sown; and when they have heard, immediately Satan comes, and takes away the word which has been sown in them.
Seèe rïìñ wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè m be laa yuu ce e m laèa aèmboè muu yïì neè yïì ncïìndap moè' ka'. E m laèa aèmboè muu yïì enáê, “AÈ yu muu waè, ká' e ntïìni m yu yoè taê.” E m ker laa aèmboè muu yïì enáê, “M be ba yïì taê, tá e ba muu waè.” Nyúè aè m be laa aèmboè yïì ncïìndap moè' wa' ka'.	"For to which of the angels did he say at any time, ""You are my Son. Today have I become your father?"" and again, ""I will be to him a Father, and he will be to me a Son?"""
Beèe a m táá a ce fyá', ñgaâa rsa' a ce vúèshi ye, a ce laèa enáê, “E m jaè' beèe moè' efa ñgá', e ja' laè yi tu foñ, ce e ka' ba Kraâis anaè ce Nyúè aè m ce.”	"The people stood watching. The rulers with them also scoffed at him, saying, ""He saved others. Let him save himself, if this is the Christ of God, his chosen one!"""
Fa túr neè yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè buu bcicïì ce beèe a ce geèe aè túè'nji na ka'. Geèe neè tá buu anaè yááti aèwañ.	Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather even reprove them.
Yu ba buu ce weèe aè m tuusi ce m ce loèr aè yuu goèr ka'. Yuu ce m ce loèr aè yuu goèr yu ba ku' sá' ce weèe be túr njo' buu anaè.	Not that I seek for the gift, but I seek for the fruit that increases to your account.
Ñwáè moè' aè ka' laa yuu mo' neè weèe, weèe suñ ye enáê, ‘Tata ce taè' geèe yuu aègho,’ tá e ku maè'shi tá weèe vú aègho.”	"If anyone says anything to you, you shall say, 'The Lord needs them,' and immediately he will send them."""
a yuu ñkúè ñwáè mboo mkïìñ, aèmboè Tata Nyúè aè m laèa neè máè.”	"and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord commanded me."""
Mbañruèñwáè ka' kwa'shi neè yi tu ená e be loèr muunje anaè ka', ce mboè aè laèa ñwáè moè' neè ye ka', e ka' cu ñkúè, riñ ená e be keèr kwaè'shi yuu mo' aèmboè njeñwáè ka', baná e geèe boèñboñ.	But he who stands steadfast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his own heart, to keep his own virgin, does well.
ená e gee yuu ce nyor boñ woweèe, laa tá Pol vú aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Woweèe a m laèa wa'a njobeè' woweèe a m cu mncúè ená Pol aè ka' ce vúè, baná woweèe a be tá' aè nduunjïì, koo yú.	asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem; plotting to kill him on the way.
A Pol weèe a seesïì a lá noèñ ce woweèe a be vúè yá ye. Noèñ anaè yi ka' gháá, woweèe a vú seê, a caa aèmboè woweèe a m ba naè, a yá Pol mbe dïì' ce e m ce cu. E m suñ woweèe aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a nashi buu ca neè woweèe káâ' aè ñgaèptú' du ba' aè mbuèuñkuèr. E m gheèter aè rgeèe tá woweèe a byemi neè Jisoès, a ce fyá' mbe mñwaâ' mncir Musïìs, ba mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè aè rduèñshi ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè.	When they had appointed him a day, many people came to him at his lodging. He explained to them, testifying about the Kingdom of God, and persuading them concerning Jesus, both from the law of Moses and from the prophets, from morning until evening.
2) Muu ca e ke jani sê.	This child is always very careless.
Baná aè tuu beèe aè rla' Jopaè tá woweèe a du vúè neè Saimúèn ce li rlii mo' li yu ená Pitaè naè.	Now send men to Joppa, and get Simon, who is surnamed Peter.
beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mntaar áè, a ka' suñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a rïîñ, baná bár beèe a fyá' ka ená buu woweèe a laèa anaè vi yu mini lá.	Let the prophets speak, two or three, and let the others discern.
Ŋwɛɛ Ncoʼ Berɛŋ [ŋwɛ̄ː ntʃɔ́ʔ béɾɛ̄ŋ] cn 7.	month of September.
Ñwáè ce e m fa Pitaè ñger ená e gee rfaè' ca neè Jus aè m ku ba ñwáè ce e m fa máè ñger foñ ená m gee rfaè' ca neè beèe enje jáá.	(for he who appointed Peter to the apostleship of the circumcision appointed me also to the Gentiles);
Jisoès aè duê, a ba' mbe ndaèp ñwáâ ñgoèr ca a yá aèmboè ñgaâa mndoñ a ce fyáp mndoñ, beèe a ce warse seê.	When Jesus came into the ruler's house, and saw the flute players, and the crowd in noisy disorder,
Woweèe a m yá aèmboè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu mo' a ce ye byee neè mmbo msii.	Now when they saw some of his disciples eating bread with defiled, that is, unwashed, hands, they found fault.
E ce rɛɛ kwâa àmbò mbʉ waʼa.	He is chewing corn like a goat.
Ñwáè moè' aè m be yá Nyúè neè mmir ka'. Muu yïì ce beèe a yá neè mmir, a ñwáè ce e geèe seèe aè riñ njáèá ñwáè ce Nyúè yu. E yu entoèmbïì neè buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè m geèe.	who is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
ba yïì ñwáè, ba yáánïì njobeè' máè byemi neè ye, ke' ba njobeè' máè láè mncir ka'. Yu Nyúè ce e ke geèe ñwáè ba yáánïì njo' e byemi.	and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own, that which is of the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith;
Ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú aè ka' buu bfee, e loo ese Nyúè. Nyúè be fa ye, njobeè' e yu mmbo mtoo, ce fa neè ñwáè wááwá, ke' cápshi nyor ka'.	But if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach; and it will be given to him.
E m ce koèñ aè rye ka' byee ñkuânyaèm, ñwáè moè' aè ke' fa ye ka'.	He wanted to fill his belly with the husks that the pigs ate, but no one gave him any.
Ŋgòŋ mboʼ zhi bòŋ à rbyè buu sê.	A Plain is very good for farming.
Weèe aè m ka' ba koosimnse njo' ñwaè' ce máè m sañ naè, yi bep máè ka'. Nyor aè m bep máè aè nfeè' entoèmbïì ce máè m yá ená ñwaè' anaè yi m geèe weèe aè koosimnse aè mú nfeè' moè'.	For though I made you sorry with my letter, I do not regret it, though I did regret it. For I see that my letter made you sorry, though just for a while.
Tata aè m laèa foñ ená beèe a fa ñgaâa rfeè'shïì buu ce aède' vi gee woweèe a cu rcu rboèñboñ.	Even so the Lord ordained that those who proclaim the Good News should live from the Good News.
Nfeè' ce a be sa' mnsa' aè gháá. Beèe ce a be sa' entombïì yu beèe Nyúè. A ka' ká' mnsa' anaè ba neè seèe, yi lo ba eká neè beèe ce a byemi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce e loè ese Nyúè naè ka'?	For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God. If it begins first with us, what will happen to those who don't obey the Good News of God?
Bfúr waê, weèe fa ce kwaè'shi buu aèmboè weèe yu lá bbonte wa' ka'. Weèe ba aèmboè bbonte ba aè njïì ce weèe be ce kwaè'shi buu bbebep ka'. Kwaè'shi neè buu ba aèmboè bleebeèe.	Brothers, don't be children in thoughts, yet in malice be babies, but in thoughts be mature.
Tata Jisos Kraâis ba Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, fa weèe cumúnyañ. Nyúè aè m koèñ seèe a fa seèe ñger nfeseè, a ker ka'ni seèe buu ce seèe aè rïìñ ená vi be ba. E m geèe buu ca njo' yi ntee boèñboñ ce e m túr neè seèe. M ce loo máná Nyúè ca fa weèe cumúnyañ, gee tá weèe táá tatap, ce geèe ba buu bboèñboñ keèr ce laèa ba buu bboèñboñ.	Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God our Father, who loved us and gave us eternal comfort and good hope through grace, comfort your hearts and establish you in every good work and word.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe Farïìsi a m fa rsa' aè nfeè' anaè ená ñwáè aè ka' riñ faèdïì' Jisoès yu, ñgaèñ vú suñ woweèe tá woweèe a bo duè koo ye.	Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had commanded that if anyone knew where he was, he should report it, that they might seize him.
Ŋgòŋ zhi yu yuur.	The weather is dry.
Nfeè' aè ka' gháá, Nyúè aè tuu muu yïì njep ñgoèñ na. AÈ m bi njeñwáè a bi muu anaè. A m bi ye aè ñwáè Judaè, e ce láè mncir Juês.	But when the fullness of the time came, God sent out his Son, born to a woman, born under the law,
E m laèa buu ca neè woweèe rara seê. Pitaè aè koo ye, a ye a lá'sïì nyor, a ká' a ce lapni ye kuu yuu ce e laèa anaè.	He spoke to them openly. Peter took him, and began to rebuke him.
E ke ba mbe ndaèp ñwáâ ñgoèr, bghee bboèñboñ ba mkïûñ mmboèñmboñ ce a geèe neè bco', ker ba mkïìñ ce a ku boo ba neè mboo mi ku ba mbo. A loè lor bghee ba mkïûñ mmboèñmboñ lá byee njo neè bkeèe, lor mkïìñ ce a ku boo ba neè mboo naè lá byee njo neè ñgaâa ndap.	Now in a large house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of clay. Some are for honor, and some for dishonor.
Tɛ ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ lòr ŋgwa banɛ e tʉr à rniŋ gùu.	Before a man marries a woman he has to follow all marital procedures.
“Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Nyúè embe buèu e ke cu ba mbe ndap ce a baè'ri neè mmbo ka'. Yi yu aèmboè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa. E m laèa enáê, Tata ce laèa enáê,	However, the Most High doesn't dwell in temples made with hands, as the prophet says,
A ke zhe mbǎŋ bìrka kaʼ.	We donʼt eat papaw seeds.
Seè'ni ce máè niñ shañ njobeè' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ na, máè ba koèñ aè rláè ye aèfa tá e lor yo dïì', ce jaè' máè.	whom I desired to keep with me, that on your behalf he might serve me in my chains for the Good News.
Weèe aè ka' loo ka' njáèá ká aè máâ rlii, m be geèe yuu anaè, tá beèe a bo kuè'si Taèr njo' Muu yïì.	Whatever you will ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “A wáè nda seê?” Jisoès aè laa enáê, “M yu ñwáè ce má ke suñ weèe aè nfeè' wááwá ená m yu naè.	"They said therefore to him, ""Who are you?"" Jesus said to them, ""Just what I have been saying to you from the beginning."
Beèe magoèr efa múè beèe ce a m byemi, a m vúèse aèwañ, a ce suñ yaèp buu bbebep.	Many also of those who had believed came, confessing, and declaring their deeds.
Baná weèe be rïìñ ená ya nlaèa yi loè ese Jisos Kraêis. Jisoès Kraâis ye ye ghashi weèe neè mmbo ce mi yu mwáèni ka', e ce faè' a weâe mú neè ñger-ñwáè.	seeing that you seek a proof of Christ who speaks in me; who toward you is not weak, but is powerful in you.
E nòŋsi cɛ̀ʼ mbe ntaʼ.	She has laid the cloth on the chair.
Seèe ka' yi ená ka' njáèá ká ce seèe ce loo, e ce yu' seèe, baná seèe riñ ená seèe aè koni yuu ce seèe aè loo ese ye wáá.	And if we know that he listens to us, whatever we ask, we know that we have the petitions which we have asked of him.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' see seèe aè ba aèmboè beèe ca, a ce geèe buu ce yïìseèe nyor aè m ce koèñ aè rgeèe ker ba vïì ce seèe aè m ce kwaè'shi aè rgeèe. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' seèe aè m ku túr ba njáèá ntee ce beèe ca a m túr, yi ba ená Nyúè be ko'si rshentee neè seèe woweèe wááwá.	among whom we also all once lived in the lust of our flesh, doing the desires of the flesh and of the mind, and were by nature children of wrath, even as the rest.
Mú nfeè' aè ka' tuuse, e natïì a du aè rla' mo' ce a m ce too ená Náên. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ba ma kúr beèe a du a woweèe.	It happened soon afterwards, that he went to a city called Nain. Many of his disciples, along with a great multitude, went with him.
Tata Jisoès aè ka' byemi, baná m be tuu Timotïì nfeè' múcaèr, tá e vú yá weèe, e kúti suñ máè nsuñ aèmboè weèe tá má máè bo lu'shi.	But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, that I also may be cheered up when I know how you are doing.
Mɛ̀ càni rfàʼ.	I was absent from work.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe túr bráâd sá'?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr túr bráâd saèambaê, ba mú nca mo'.”	"Jesus said to them, ""How many loaves do you have?"" They said, ""Seven, and a few small fish."""
Yi yu aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e m kwáè' goèr aè m túr goèr se ka'. Ñwáè ce e m kwáè' múcaèr aè m túr múcaèr se ka'.”	"As it is written, ""He who gathered much had nothing left over, and he who gathered little had no lack."""
Woweèe a ka' yu', ntee yi bep woweèe seê, woweèe a ká' a ce kwaè'shi aè ryú ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès.	But they, when they heard this, were cut to the heart, and determined to kill them.
E m ku ce noèñ, túè' ce raa, nyúè ce coo. Kwaa ce e m byeè naè aè fúú a ce kuè', e ke' yi aèmboè e geèe a ka' ce kuè' ka'.	and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should spring up and grow, he doesn't know how.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè yi yú' ce yi yu rara, Tata Nyúè aè fúr Jisoès efa rkwe a yeâ ñger, aè rduèñshi ená e yu muu yïì.	who was declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord,
“Nyúè aè cete maêp mmir, a teesi wap btu faè dïì' woweèe a bo yá rraa ca neè maêp mmir, rïìñ buu ca, beèesi yap ntee vúè a máâ mbuèu tá m bo geèe woweèe a luñ ka'.”	He has blinded their eyes and he hardened their heart, lest they should see with their eyes, and perceive with their heart, and would turn, and I would heal them.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Tata aè laèa enáê, ‘AÈmboè m yu nteèe na ñwáè wááwá be keè gú'shi njep máâ tïìi. Ñwáè wááwá be keè laèa neè yi cuèu ená m yu Nyúè.”	"For it is written, ""'As I live,' says the Lord, 'to me every knee will bow. Every tongue will confess to God.'"""
E be vúè njeè múè mcuèñ mor, fa ñgá' neè beèe ce a máñni Nyúè a kani efa rgeèe yuu ce Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Tata Jisoès ce laèa ená a geêe.	giving vengeance to those who don't know God, and to those who don't obey the Good News of our Lord Jesus,
njobeè' e m ce yá'ni ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a ce laa neè woweèe enáê, “A be loèr Muu Ñwáè fa mbaè mmbo beèe, tá a yú ye, tá e fúú efa rkwe mbenjïì mnoâñ btaar.”	"For he was teaching his disciples, and said to them, ""The Son of Man is being handed over to the hands of men, and they will kill him; and when he is killed, on the third day he will rise again."""
Beâe aè rla' anaè a ka' yá aèmboè nyo ce láñláñ ye aè boè, woweèe a laa fa waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè anaè ku ba ñwáè ce e yú ñwáè. Ka' e luèñ efa rkwe enjep roè wa'a, e ku bii nyaèa rkwe.”	"When the natives saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said one to another, ""No doubt this man is a murderer, whom, though he has escaped from the sea, yet Justice has not allowed to live."""
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè m ce loâ vúè ce geèe túè anaè yi ce bañti. Túè anaè yi m ce bañti wa'a, ñwáè ce e ka' gwe njo entombïì, e m ka' ce yañ ba njáèá yañ ká, baná e be luèñ.]	for an angel went down at certain times into the pool, and stirred up the water. Whoever stepped in first after the stirring of the water was made whole of whatever disease he had.
Cena yi ka' mïì, ncïìndap Nyúè yïì elúèsimbuèu aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, máè yu' mnjeèndoñ aèmboè vi suèu embe buèu. Mnjeèndoñ ca vi m laèa mbekïì enáê, “Nfeè' aè gháá ce yïìseèe Nyúè ba Kraâis ce e m tuusi njep ñgoèñ na, a be sa' ñgoèñ ca. Nyúè be sa' ñgoèñ ca nfeseè.”	"The seventh angel sounded, and great voices in heaven followed, saying, ""The kingdom of the world has become the Kingdom of our Lord, and of his Christ. He will reign forever and ever!"""
E m laèa enáê, “Kupse-neè yeè ndeèe, ma' yeè buu bbebep njobeè' nfeè' ce kúú Nyúè yi be káè', ce gháá.”	Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand!
Hagaè táá aètu leè' ce a m ye mbe rtuèu Sinaèi ce li yu ba aè ñgoâñ AÈrábïìyaè, a ker táá foñ aètu rla' Jáèrusaláèm lïû seè'ni na, njobeè' beâe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm wááwá a yu bkwaèa neè mncir.	For this Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to the Jerusalem that exists now, for she is in bondage with her children.
AÈ ka' ba mbe nfeè' moè', Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè' aè duñshïì seèe yi ñgeâe boèñboñ ba li rkoèñnïì,	But when the kindness of God our Savior and his love toward mankind appeared,
Waè' aè caèa yeèr ta Jakoèp ce e m tuñ rdip ca neè weèr a? E m no mdip enjep rdip rtuñ ca a boo vi weèe ker ba yi nyaèa.”	"Are you greater than our father, Jacob, who gave us the well, and drank of it himself, as did his children, and his livestock?"""
Ntombì yu mɛ̀.	I am the first.
Wèr be dù fa yě mbùu.	We will follow him.
Yaèp masaè aè m cu aè mbeè seê, a ka' kúti, a fyá' ená woweèe a m di' gee eká neè mbaèa ce e m fa neè woweèe naè lá.	"Now after a long time the lord of those servants came, and reconciled accounts with them.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	20	Ñwáè ce e m koo ncúèkïì ta naè, aè vú neè ncúèkïì ta moè', a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, wáè m fa máè ncúèkïì taê. Yáê, máè geèe ntaa aègho a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì taê.’	He who received the five talents came and brought another five talents, saying, 'Lord, you delivered to me five talents. Behold, I have gained another five talents besides them.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	21	Yïì masaè aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Yaè ñwáè rfaâ' mboèñmboñ, aè yu ñwáâ mini. Wáè geèe yáánïì seê. Wáè fyá' aè yuu ce yi yu múcaèr boèñboñ, baná m be fa wáè ñger mbenduè yïû goèr. Vúè tá weèe yoè masaè lúshi aèbee.’	His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'"
Zhìi mâ à m̀ so mnsaʼ njobèʼ e m̀ làa ba zhìi làayɛ.	Her mother won the case because she spoke the truth.
Bfúr waê, weèe wááwá ce be'ni ba yuu ce m ce geèe. Weèr aè duèñshi ndeâe mboèñmboñ. Weèe be'ni yuu ce beèe ce a beè'ni yeèr ndeèe anaè, a ce geèe.	Brothers, be imitators together of me, and note those who walk this way, even as you have us for an example.
M ce koèñ máná weèe kuushi buu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m ba beâe brara a m ce laèa, ker ba yuu ce Tata Jisoès ce e geèe seèe aè luñ aè m laèa ená weèe geêe. E m tuu yi ñgaâa ntuu a vú a suñ weèe buu anaè.	that you should remember the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets, and the commandments of us, the apostles of the Lord and Savior:
Yi ka' ba wa'a, seèe ka' loo ka' njáèá ká, e be fa seèe njobeè' seèe ce geèe buu ce e ce laèa, ker ce geèe buu ce yi boèñ ye.	and whatever we ask, we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do the things that are pleasing in his sight.
neè yaè beèe ce a yu bfúr wa seeseê, weèr woweèe aè ba láá e mo'sir. M ce koèñ máná ndoèo co' máè, tá weèr Jisos Kraâis gapni, ce yi ka' ba ená ñgaèpni anaè yi be jaè' yaè beèe.	For I could wish that I myself were accursed from Christ for my brothers' sake, my relatives according to the flesh,
A mbuèu ce yïì ta ba yïì ma a m laèa enáê, “E yu nleeñwáè, bipshi neè neè ye.”	"Therefore his parents said, ""He is of age. Ask him."""
Woweèe a ka' ce duè ce caèa aè mla' anaè, a ce suñ beâe aèfo buu ce ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ba btu embe cor aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m seèesi a laa ená woweèe a geêe. A m laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a gee buu anaè.	As they went on their way through the cities, they delivered the decrees to them to keep which had been ordained by the apostles and elders who were at Jerusalem.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce Nyúè aè ce máè ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ ñwaè' ca weèr Timotïì ce e yu nfúr yïìseèe.	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother,
A ye e nyɛɛ encàŋ nà.	There he is coming from afar.
E m duè a Máèári ce e m ce niñ guèu aègho tá a ye a bo duè sañ mlii. Máèári aè m ba neè rbúè.	to enroll himself with Mary, who was pledged to be married to him as wife, being pregnant.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá, nyor aè bep woweèe, woweèe a laa enáê, “A jarsi mgúr ca aè cicïì wa'a njoká?	"But when his disciples saw this, they were indignant, saying, ""Why this waste?"
E ka' yu' wa'a, nyor aè bep ye seê, njobeè' e m túr ku' buu seê.	But when he heard these things, he became very sad, for he was very rich.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Taèr, Tata ce aè túr rbuu ba nshe, m ce yoèñshi wáè njobeè' wáè súèti buu ca ese ñgaâa bfee ba beèe ce a rïìñ buu, a duñshi ba neè boo bká'.	"At that time, Jesus answered, ""I thank you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you hid these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to infants."
E jèŋ waʼa njokɛ?	Why is he confused?
Ca yi ka' mïì, ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, ce a m ce too ená Judas IÌskarïìyoèt, aè du a yá beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì,	Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, went to the chief priests,
Jisoès aè m laèa wa'a tá beèe a bo rïìñ njáèá rkwe ce e be kwe.	But he said this, signifying by what kind of death he should die.
Nyúè aè m naèa ye a cusi a yeâ bo maè' aèmboè ñwáè múè' nduunjïì neè beèe, ba ñwáè rjaè', tá e bo fa beèe njïì aè rkupseè, maè' yaèp buu bbebep tá Nyúè bo foèosi woweèe efa yaèp buu bbebep.	God exalted him with his right hand to be a Prince and a Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins.
A niŋ à kòp a roo ŋguu a yɛ kaʼ.	They entered in the forest, looked for firewood and did not see any.
E bàŋsi mŋgòmbe.	She has stored banana so that they can get ripe.
Ñwáè aè ka' ce geèe ba buu ce yïì nyor koèñ, baná ñgaèñ be koni rbep ba rkwe. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe ba buu ce Yú' Nyúè yi koèñ, baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	For he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption. But he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life.
Weèe ce kwaè'shi ená beèe ca a no mruè' mi koo woweèe. Yi yu wa' ka'. Seè'ni ku bii nyúè búè'ú aè ñgaèptú'.	For these aren't drunken, as you suppose, seeing it is only the third hour of the day.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe Isráèl, AÈsayaè aè m laèa yuu a kuu woweèe. E m laèa enáê, “Ka' beèe Isráèl a yu goèr aèmboè nsaruñ aèwaâa roè wa'a, ku ba beèe múcaèr efa waâp mú ce a be luèñ.”	"Isaiah cries concerning Israel, ""If the number of the children of Israel are as the sand of the sea, it is the remnant who will be saved;"
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ tá weèe riñ ená ñgá' ce e koni máè na aè geèe Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aè misïì a du kuèntombïì.	Now I desire to have you know, brothers, that the things which happened to me have turned out rather to the progress of the Good News;
Máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m túr ñger magoèr seê. E m waa, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ghááte aè rnaèa nlaèadoñ ce a sïìñ bcuèu fuè ñwaè' aègho naè, búèr ñwaè' anaè yu nda?”	"I saw a mighty angel proclaiming with a loud voice, ""Who is worthy to open the book, and to break its seals?"""
Ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m tár yi kuèu mbenduè rdip rgoèr, a tár mo' mbenduè nshe naè aè naa yi bo maè' mbe buèu.	The angel who I saw standing on the sea and on the land lifted up his right hand to the sky,
E ka' túr yuu ce e la' rkaa anaè aègho ka', yïì masaè aè laa ená a koo ye ba ñgwa yïì ba boo vi, ker lor yïì buu wááwá, fyeni la' li rkaa aègho.	But because he couldn't pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, with his wife, his children, and all that he had, and payment to be made.
Nyúè aè m loèr buu wááwá a lá njeptii Jisoès, a ker gee ená e ba tu neè coêr, ce sa' buu wááwá.	He put all things in subjection under his feet, and gave him to be head over all things for the assembly,
Ma yïì Jisoès ker ba bfúr vi a m vúè aè ryá ye, nduunjïì yi ke' ba neè woweèe aè ryá ye ka' njobeè' beèe a m ba goèr seê.	His mother and brothers came to him, and they could not come near him for the crowd.
M ce ko'ndoñ neè weèe neè njáèá ñko'ndoñ ce Nyúè túr. Weèe yu aèmboè muunje ce e be riñ mbañruèñwáè ka', máè kanïì máná m be guèusi ye neè mbañruèñwáè moè'sir caè'caè'. Mbañruèñwáè ca yu Jisos Kraêis.	For I am jealous over you with a godly jealousy. For I married you to one husband, that I might present you as a pure virgin to Christ.
E kanïì aè bsii beèe wááwá, a laa enáê, “M rïìñ yuu ce aè ce laèa ka'.”	"But he denied it before them all, saying, ""I don't know what you are talking about."""
Woweèe a kútïì a suñ bár beèe, woweèe a ker byemi ka'.	They went away and told it to the rest. They didn't believe them, either.
Hároèd ba vi bsoogáè a m vúèshi ye, a lor ye aè yuu cicïì, a lor cáâ' boèñboñ a ma' ye aè nyoèr, a kúsi ye neè Pailáèt.	Herod with his soldiers humiliated him and mocked him. Dressing him in luxurious clothing, they sent him back to Pilate.
Awá Jus a ká' a ce sár mnsár a waâp mú tatap seê, a ce laèa enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè fa yïì nyor neè seèe ená seèe ye aè njáâá ká?”	"The Jews therefore contended with one another, saying, ""How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"""
Ñgúè buu moè' aè m gweèñger aè múè msini, msini mi ku', a kur.	Others fell among thorns. The thorns grew up and choked them.
Cu neè rcu rboèñboñ aè múè beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' tá woweèe a ka' ba ce laèa ená weèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep áè, tá a bo yá buu bboèñboñ ce weèe ce geèe, kuè'si Nyúè aè noèñ ce e be vúè aè rsa' ñgoèñ.	having good behavior among the nations, so in that of which they speak against you as evildoers, they may by your good works, which they see, glorify God in the day of visitation.
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsi a ká' a ce laèa enjep ntee enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ce bepsi rlii Nyúè na a nda? Ñwáè ce aède' e foosïì ñwáè efa buu bbebep caa efa Nyúè yu nda?”	"The scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, ""Who is this that speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?"""
Nyo anaè aè fúr mdip ekuè cuèu, mi ba aèmboè rdip wa'a. E m fúr mdip anaè tá mi bo loèr njeñwáè anaè duè aègho.	The serpent spewed water out of his mouth after the woman like a river, that he might cause her to be carried away by the stream.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe ená a fa suñ ñwáè moè' ka'. A ker laa neè woweèe ená a fa muu anaè byee tá e ye.	He strictly ordered them that no one should know this, and commanded that something should be given to her to eat.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè muu, Nyúè aè laa enáê, “Wáâ Nyúè, yo kúú yi be cu nfeseè. AÈ be sa' yo to' neè mini-ñwáè.	"But of the Son he says, ""Your throne, O God, is forever and ever. The scepter of uprightness is the scepter of your Kingdom."
Koèniyuès aè laa enáê, “Mnoèñ vi caèa seè'ni kyeèe ce máè mú ba mbe máâ ndaèp, aè nfeâ' seè'ni ce yu nyúè taar neèmootïì na, a ce loo. Ñwáè moè' aè ku lo a táá kuèntombïì neè máè, a yar bcáè' ce vi m ce raa seê,	"Cornelius said, ""Four days ago, I was fasting until this hour, and at the ninth hour, I prayed in my house, and behold, a man stood before me in bright clothing,"
Woweèe a m ce yoèp yáá ce Musïìs ce e m ce faè' neè Nyúè aè m yoèp, aè ba yáá Muu Njeèe foñ naè. Woweèe a m yoèp enáê, “Wáâ Nyúè ce aè yu yeèr taê, ñger wááwá yi yu mba wáâ mmboè. Mo mfaè' mi caèa ñger, aè ba foñ mfaâ' mmbáèá. AÈ yu ñkúú neè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na, buu ce wáâ geèe vi ku ba yáánïì, a ba mini aè nfeè' wááwá.	"They sang the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, ""Great and marvelous are your works, Lord God, the Almighty! Righteous and true are your ways, you King of the nations."
Woweèe a m naèa weèr aè mnduunjïû jáá jáèá jáá. Weèr aè ka' niñ mbe keñ tá weèr bo ce duè, woweèe a fa weèr buu ce vi bo jaè' weèr.	They also honored us with many honors, and when we sailed, they put on board the things that we needed.
Woowèe a kani yapyu.	They have refused.
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yu' wa'a, a vúshi ye njobeè' woweèe a m koèñ mbaèa seê.	The Pharisees, who were lovers of money, also heard all these things, and they scoffed at him.
Bfúr waê, fyá' ka neè njáèá beèe ce weèe aè m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m ká' weèe ená weèe ba yïì beèe. Weèe ka' fyá' a weâe mú weèe yá ená beèe ce ñgoèñ ca yi m loèr ená a túr bfee a yu goèr ka'. Beèe ce ñgoèñ ca yi m kwaè'shi foñ ená a yu beâe bgoèrgoèr a ker túr mnta' bgoèrgoèr a yu goèr ka'.	For you see your calling, brothers, that not many are wise according to the flesh, not many mighty, and not many noble;
Yi ku ba wa' foñ seè'ni na. Mú beèe moè' a ku ba aè múè beèe Isráèl ce Nyúè aè ce njo' yi ntee boèñboñ.	Even so then at this present time also there is a remnant according to the election of grace.
E ker bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “M taa ye mbe kïìntaa njoká? Yuu bebep ce ñwáè ca aè geèe seeseê, yu ba ká?” Woweèe a ku ce waani, a ce laèa enáê, “Taa lá ye mbe kïìntaa.”	"But the governor said, ""Why? What evil has he done?"" But they cried out exceedingly, saying, ""Let him be crucified!"""
baná seèe lá ntee njep ye, ke' ce tarni yuu mo' ka', niñ mbe dïì' anaè neè ntee e mo'sir. AÈde' seèe gee wa'a njobeè' a ñwañshi viseèe mntee neè bláá Jisoès vi ba brara, seèe aè ker ce kwaè'shi ená seèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep ka', a ba ba beèe ce a suè'si wap mnyor neè mdip mrara.	let's draw near with a true heart in fullness of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and having our body washed with pure water,
Bfeè' ncúèkïì ca vi be mïì tá a fúr Sataèn efa shañ,	And after the thousand years, Satan will be released from his prison,
Ñgoèñ yi be mïì, tá buu wááwá ce beèe a ce yá mbo, a ce roèo aè rtúr, vi mi foñ. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yuu ce Nyúè ce roèo, baná ñgaèñ be cu nfeseè.	The world is passing away with its lusts, but he who does God's will remains forever.
Mɛ̀ dù soso a yuʼ nè yaa tùʼ.	I went there and heard it myself.
Nkòr zhi koo yaa ŋgʉp.	My fowl has been infested by fleas.
Wɛ̀ gàp mbàa, a fa zhi muu wòo gòr, banɛ yǎanà a mnàŋ.	You have shared money and given your child more, therefore that is partiality.
Woweèe a yu' rboèñ neè yuu ce e suñ woweèe, a ka'ni ená a be fa ye mbaèa. Judaès aè ká' a ce roèo nduunjïì aè rfyeèni Jisoès.	They, when they heard it, were glad, and promised to give him money. He sought how he might conveniently deliver him.
Geèe neè wa'a, má vúè bo sañ ñwaè', loèr mbaèa ce weèe aè kuèu naè kyeèse aègee ñwaè' anaè tuusi neè beèe ce weèe aè ce tá woweèe a du aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	When I arrive, I will send whoever you approve with letters to carry your gracious gift to Jerusalem.
Pitaè ba ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès ca a natïì a cañ a du faèdïì' ce rsheè li m ba naè.	Therefore Peter and the other disciple went out, and they went toward the tomb.
Kúr beèe a ka' yá yuu ce Pol aè m geèe na, a waa, a laa aè li Lïìkonïìyaè enáê, “Mnyúè vi kúti aèmboè beèe wa'a, a vú fa seâe mú.”	"When the multitude saw what Paul had done, they lifted up their voice, saying in the language of Lycaonia, ""The gods have come down to us in the likeness of men!"""
Ñwáè ce e m koo ncúèkïì baa naè, aè vú foñ, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, wáè m fa máè ncúèkïì baa. Yáê, máè geèe ntaa aègho a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì baa.’	"He also who got the two talents came and said, 'Lord, you delivered to me two talents. Behold, I have gained another two talents besides them.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	23	Yïì masaè aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Yaè ñwáè rfaâ' mboèñmboñ, aè yu ñwáâ mini. Wáè geèe yáánïì seê. Wáè fyá' aè yuu ce yi yu múcaèr boèñboñ, baná m be fa wáè ñger mbenduè yïû goèr. Vúè tá weèe yoè masaè lúshi aèbee.’	His lord said to him, 'Well done, good and faithful servant. You have been faithful over a few things, I will set you over many things. Enter into the joy of your lord.'"
Loo neè ená Nyúè fúr máè embaè mmbo beèe aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis ka' naè. Loo neè foñ ená beèe Nyúâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a yu' rboèñ neè mbaèa ce m ce duè fa neè woweèe,	that I may be delivered from those who are disobedient in Judea, and that my service which I have for Jerusalem may be acceptable to the saints;
Awá Sataèn aè ma'shïì ye a duê, bcïìndap Nyúè a vúê, a ke' aè ye.	Then the devil left him, and behold, angels came and served him.
“Yaè beèe, bfúr waê, ba yaè ta weèe, yu' neè yuu ce e m be laèa.”	Brothers and fathers, listen to the defense which I now make to you.
Baná weèe fa táá kuèu weèe njáèá beèe ca weèe ka'.	Therefore don't be partakers with them.
Máè m maè'shi ená aè cu aè to' Kreât tá aè bo naèshi buu embe cor ce vi yu yáánïì ka' naè, keèr ce btu embe cor aè bcor ce vi yu aè bu' mla' wááwá. Kuushi ená máè m laèa neè wáè ená,	I left you in Crete for this reason, that you would set in order the things that were lacking, and appoint elders in every city, as I directed you;
Luk ce weèr koèñ seê, ce e ke fa beèe mcáèp naè, ker ba Dimaès, a caè'ni weèe.	Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas greet you.
AÈde' ñwáè ce e ce cu aèbee a ye ker ce geèe yuu bebep ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yuu bebep baná ñgaèñ aè be yá ye ka', a riñ ye ka'.	Whoever remains in him doesn't sin. Whoever sins hasn't seen him, neither knows him.
Yeè naèatu anaè boèñ ka'. Mboè weèe rïìñ ená aède' yuu bebep e moè'sir yi bepsïì cor nsïìp a?	Your boasting is not good. Don't you know that a little yeast leavens the whole lump?
aè rba neè rbonïì-ñwáè, aè rmaè'shi yoè nyor aèwaèa ka'. Ncir mo' yi yu ce yi kani beèe efa rgeèe buu ca ka'.	gentleness, and self-control. Against such things there is no law.
Beèe ce a yu bkwaèa, a ce yá ñgá', a ba loèr wap mmasaè aèmboè beèe ce woweèe a ba yu'ni neè woweèe boèñboñ seê, faè dïì' ñwáè lo laèa yuu bebep kuèu Nyúè ker ba buu ce weèr ce yá'ni beèe na ka'.	Let as many as are bondservants under the yoke count their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and the doctrine not be blasphemed.
Njáèá ñwáè ce e túr mkwaè'shïì mmbaa wa'a ce koko koko. E fa kwaè'shi ená e be koni yuu mo' ese Tata ka'.	For let that man not think that he will receive anything from the Lord. He is a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
ŋgwèŋgèr [ŋgwèŋgèɾ] n 1a.	syphilis.
Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “Yi ka' ku ba ba ená soè kwe aèbee, m kanïì ka'.” Bár ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu wááwá a ku laa wa' foñ.	"Peter said to him, ""Even if I must die with you, I will not deny you."" All of the disciples also said likewise."
Mbèŋ à ba jepsi mɛ̀ efa rdù ntaa.	The rain disturbed me from going to the market.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger a be keè fúú efa rkwe, weèe aè m be be' embe ñwaè' Musïìs embe dïì' ce yi ce suñ aèmboè ce ce mor yi m ce káti mbo naè ka' a? Nyúè aè m laèa mbo neè Musïìs enáê, ‘A máè Nyúè Abraèhaêm, a ba Nyúè Aisïìk, a ker ba Nyúè Jakoèp’ a?	But about the dead, that they are raised; haven't you read in the book of Moses, about the Bush, how God spoke to him, saying, 'I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob'?
Jus ca yu beèe ce a m yú Tata Jisoès, a ker yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè. Woweèe a m fa weèr ñgá', a juu weèr, a ce geèe ñgeèe ce yi boèñ Nyúè ka', a ker baa beèe wááwá.	who killed both the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and drove us out, and didn't please God, and are contrary to all men;
Rtùu ca rli ke cùʼŋger.	This hill often slides.
“Duè neè nje rla' rká' enje weâe cuèu na. Weèe be baè' tá weèe yá aèmboè a cúú muu jaèaki' ce ñwáè aè m be cu mbo ka'. Wee yá, weèe fyáá vú aègho mbena.	"saying, ""Go your way into the village on the other side, in which, as you enter, you will find a colt tied, whereon no man ever yet sat. Untie it, and bring it."
Mbòŋ e ke buu rba kaʼ.	A good person never lacks faults.
Ye ye aè gwe njeptii Pitaè, a kwe. Boo mnsuènsuè a ka' vúè, a yá aèmboè e kwe, woweèe a byá', a du aègho, a tuñ aègee nduu yïì.	She fell down immediately at his feet, and died. The young men came in and found her dead, and they carried her out and buried her by her husband.
Jisoès aè m ruu neè Yú' Rara. E m kúti efa rdip Jodaèn, Yú' Rara anaè yi lor ye a du aègho aè ntee rïìñ,	Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness
E ka' kuè fúú embe keñ, ñwáè moè' ce yú' bebep yi m niñ njep ye aè vú efa dïì' ce a m ce tuñ beèe, aè ryá ye.	When he had come out of the boat, immediately a man with an unclean spirit met him out of the tombs.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Yuu ce yi yu btatap se neè ñwáè, yi yu aètáèr neè Nyúè.”	"But he said, ""The things which are impossible with men are possible with God."""
cn 1/2.	sexually obsessed male.
baná yïì masaè be vúè aè noâñ mo', aè nfeè' ce e ba riñ ka',	the lord of that servant will come in a day when he doesn't expect it, and in an hour when he doesn't know it,
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Mluè mi ce koo weèe njoká? Weèe ce tarni njoká?	"He said to them, ""Why are you troubled? Why do doubts arise in your hearts?"
Muu Njeèe ca aè ka' keèr naèa nlaèadoñ mo', máè yu' aèmboè yuu teèe mo' yi laèa enáê, “Vúè!” Máè ker fyá' a yá nyaèabaèraâ' nsii. Ñwáè ce e m cu mbo aè m túr ndoñ ce a ke feè' buu njo mbaè bo.	"When he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, ""Come and see!"" And behold, a black horse, and he who sat on it had a balance in his hand."
E yoʼ nyor nè mgʉr.	He rubbed his body with oil.
Nfeè' aè m tuuse ka', e natïì mbekïì aè bsii beèe wááwá, a lor yi keèñ a ce yoèñshi Nyúè a ce duè fa yeâ laè'.	Immediately he rose up before them, and took up that which he was laying on, and departed to his house, glorifying God.
Boo waê, seèe be kuè cu ba aè nfeè' múcaècaèr. Weèe be roèo máè. Yi ku ba aèmboè máè m suñ Jus enáê, ‘AÈde' weèe vú faèdïì' ce m ce duè ka'’ naè.	Little children, I will be with you a little while longer. You will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, 'Where I am going, you can't come,' so now I tell you.
Njùʼ à du a kʉʼ njàp.	Njuh has harvested the vegetable.
geèe buu neè bfee-ñwáè, ba brara enjep ntee, fyá' wap mndap boèñboñ, geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe mo', yu'ni neè bduu wap. Woweèe a gee wa'a faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo koni njïì aè rlaèa yuu bebep aèmboè blaâa Nyúè njo' yap ñgeèe ka'.	to be sober minded, chaste, workers at home, kind, being in subjection to their own husbands, that God's word may not be blasphemed.
Mbʉ yu nè rbee.	The goat is pregnant.
Baná m ce suñ weèe máná weèe lor wee bkuè' ce vi bep na, koo bkar aègho, e ba aè nfeè' ce bkuè' anaè vi ker ba ka', tá a bo koni weèe mbe rla' ce a ke cu mbo nfeseè.	I tell you, make for yourselves friends by means of unrighteous mammon, so that when you fail, they may receive you into the eternal tents.
Mnoèñ vi ka' baâ' btaar, woweèe a lor buu mfaè' embe keñ neè map mmbo, a ma'ri njep roè.	On the third day, they threw out the ship's tackle with their own hands.
Tata Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Naèti du njep nduunjïì ce a too ená Kuèyáá naè, du mbe ndaèp mbe Judaès, laa ená wáâ koèñ aè ryá ñwáâ aè rla' Tasoès ce li rlii li yu ená Sol naè. E ce geèe rloo seè'ni na.	"The Lord said to him, ""Arise, and go to the street which is called Straight, and inquire in the house of Judah for one named Saul, a man of Tarsus. For behold, he is praying,"
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Máè ce m ce laèa neè wáè na, a máè ñwáè anaè.”	"Jesus said to her, ""I am he, the one who speaks to you."""
Blaâa bcece' vi fúú eku waâp bcuèu.	whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
Govanoè aè naa bo ená Pol laêa, Pol aè laa enáê, “Máè rïìñ máná wáè sa' to' ca aè bfeè' aèñgoo, máè ce lu'shi aè rsuñ yuu ce yi yu.	"When the governor had beckoned to him to speak, Paul answered, ""Because I know that you have been a judge of this nation for many years, I cheerfully make my defense,"
Rʉ̀ʉsi ka yoʼ ca enɛ zhi rʉ̀ʉ àmbò kɛ lɛ.	Smell this rubbing oil and tell how it is smelling.
Yàa maa ce vʉni bʉ̀.	My mother is proclaiming the birth.
Baná seèe gheter ba' mbe dïû' rlúèshïì anaè. Ñwáè fa ba ce e be buu efa rbaè' aè dïì' anaè njobeè' e teèe tu aèmboè viseèe bta a m teèe naè ka'.	Let us therefore give diligence to enter into that rest, lest anyone fall after the same example of disobedience.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Beèe mo' a ce laèa ená aè yu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe, beèe mo' ená aè yu AÈlajaè, beèe mo' ená aè yu moè' efa ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè eluâuñgoèñ ce e fúú efa rkwe.”	"They answered, ""'John the Baptizer,' but others say, 'Elijah,' and others, that one of the old prophets is risen again."""
Ka' yi yu wa'a, máè sañ ñwaè' ca a laa buu moè' mbo neè weèe tatap seê, tá weèe bo kuushi buu anaè. Máè geèe wa'a neè ñger ce Nyúè aè fa neè máè njo' yi ntee boèñboñ,	But I write the more boldly to you in part, as reminding you, because of the grace that was given to me by God,
Ñwáè ce e suñ buu ca aè laèa enáê, “Yi yu mini, m ce vúè seè'ni seè'ni.” Yi yu wa'a. Vúè, Tata Jisoès.	"He who testifies these things says, ""Yes, I come quickly."" Amen! Yes, come, Lord Jesus."
Tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì efa múè Jus e ke tañshi tañshïì aètu buu bbebep beèe. E ke tañshi tañshïì ca, lor ba bláá caè'caè' niñ aègho mbe dïû' rara ce yi caèa ñger naè, lor nyaèa ce a ba sáá naè fúú aègho efa múè rla', too neè mor.	For the bodies of those animals, whose blood is brought into the holy place by the high priest as an offering for sin, are burned outside of the camp.
“Wáè ce koèñ ená m gee máká neè wáè?” E beesïì enáê, “Tataê, m ce koèñ máná aè gee tá m ker yá buu.”	"What do you want me to do? He said, ""Lord, that I may see again."""
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Yu ye dïì' aè rrïìñ nfeè' káè mnoèñ ce Taèr aè láè aè yi ñger ka'.	"He said to them, ""It isn't for you to know times or seasons which the Father has set within his own authority."
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèr, weèr yu aèmboè beèe mo' ce a loèr blaâa Nyúè aè ba yuu ntaa naè ka'. AÈ tuu ba Nyúè a tuu weèr, weèr aè ce feè'shi vi blaèa a yeâ bsii neè mini-ñwáè, aè rlii Kraêis.	For we are not as so many, peddling the word of God. But as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, we speak in Christ.
E m lapni ñkúú Hároèd njobeè' e m fúr Háèrodïìyaè ce e m ba ñgwa nfúr yïû muu ma naè, ker ba njobeè' ku' buu bbebep mo' ce e m geèe.	but Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias, his brother's wife, and for all the evil things which Herod had done,
E beesïì a laa enáê, “Rtarnïì li yu njo ka', AÈlajaè be vúè. E be vúè geèe tá buu wááwá kúti aèmboè vi m ba.	"Jesus answered them, ""Elijah indeed comes first, and will restore all things,"
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' anaè, ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a kútïì. A ka' kúti yá aèmboè Jisoès ce de' a njeñwáè, woweèe a bááñgeèr seê. Ñwáè moè' aè m bipshi yuu ce njeñwáè anaè aè m ce roèo káè mbuèu ce Jisoès aè m ce de' a ye ka'.	"At this, his disciples came. They marveled that he was speaking with a woman; yet no one said, ""What are you looking for?"" or, ""Why do you speak with her?"""
E ka' laèa wa'a, a du a táá njep cuèu ñka' embe mambe anaè, muunje moè' ce e m ba ñwáè rfaè' aè ker yá ye, a laa neè beèe ce a m ba aèfo enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè m ba a Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt.”	"When he had gone out onto the porch, someone else saw him, and said to those who were there, ""This man also was with Jesus of Nazareth."""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèe aè gee ntee yi fúteè weèr. Kyese aègee ntee ce yi m fúte weèr na, weèr aè m yu' rboèñ se aè ryá njáèá njïì ce Taitoès aè m ce lu'shi, njobeè' weèe aè m geèe yi ntee yi ke' ce bu' ka'.	Therefore we have been comforted. In our comfort we rejoiced the more exceedingly for the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
Seèe aè byemi ená yu ba njo' ntee boèñboñ Tata Jisoès ce seèe be keè luèñ aèmboè woweèe a be keè luèñ njo' li foñ naè.”	"But we believe that we are saved through the grace of the Lord Jesus, just as they are."""
Weèr aè m fa njïì neè woweèe koo múcaèr ka', faè dïì' a kupse nsuñ mboèñmboñ ca, jepsi weèe ka'.	to whom we gave no place in the way of subjection, not for an hour, that the truth of the Good News might continue with you.
Buu ca be ba neè beèe aèmboè aè nfeè' ce njeñwáè e ke káè' ce luuti muu naè.	But all these things are the beginning of birth pains.
A mboè weèe ku ba wa' foñ. Beèe a yá weèe efa mmïìr, weèe yáátïì aè beâe byáánïì, a fyá' enjep mú, weèe ba ñgaâa mbo'ni, a ba ñgaâa bsaèrbuu.	Even so you also outwardly appear righteous to men, but inwardly you are full of hypocrisy and iniquity.
A sañ mbuèu ce a taa ye mbe kïìntaa, a la' mbe tu kïìntaa. A m sañ mbo enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu Jisoès ce ñkúú Juês.”	"They set up over his head the accusation against him written, ""THIS IS JESUS, THE KING OF THE JEWS."""
M ce lu'shi magoèr aè ryá máná boo wee mo' a ce táá njep yuu mini aèmboè Taèr aè m laèa neè seèe.	I rejoice greatly that I have found some of your children walking in truth, even as we have been commanded by the Father.
Geewa'a, Baènabaès aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe múè ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès. E m suñ neè woweèe ená Sol aè yá Tata Jisoès aè nduunjïì, Tata aè laa neè ye. E m ker suñ woweèe ená Sol aè m feè'shi aè rlii Jisoès, neè ntee-ñwáè aè rla' Daèmaskoès	But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how at Damascus he had preached boldly in the name of Jesus.
Beèe Farïìsi a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a geèe yuu ce ncir yi kani ená ñwáè fa geèe nyúè mmbomntaa nyúè ka' njoká?”	"The Pharisees said to him, ""Behold, why do they do that which is not lawful on the Sabbath day?"""
Woweèe a ka' geèe buu wááwá ce ncir Tata Nyúè yi m ce laèa ená a geêe, a kúti aè lap rla' Nasaráèt aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	When they had accomplished all things that were according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city, Nazareth.
E ba aè noèñ entoèmbïì enjep ñgaèa ñwáè wááwá lor ñgúè' moè' efa mbaèa ce Nyúè aè ghoèni ye aègho, láê, faè dïì' m ka' vú tá beèe a bo keèr loèr nfeè' moè' aè rkuèu mbaèa ka'.	On the first day of the week, let each one of you save, as he may prosper, that no collections be made when I come.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, rkwe li m ku ba aè nfeè' ce ncir yi m be ba ka', ká' ese aè nfeè' yïì Adaèm du ba' aè nfeè' yïì Musïìs, rkwe li m ku ba, ka' woweèe a m geèe njáèá yuu bebep ce Adaèm aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce e m teèe tu neè Nyúè naè ka' wa'a. Adaèm yu aèmboè rleèñshi Jisos Kraâis ce e bii ka' vúè.	Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those whose sins weren't like Adam's disobedience, who is a foreshadowing of him who was to come.
Máâ laèa ca seè'ni ba neè bkúè ker ba byepkúú. Yi yu boèñboñ ená woweèe a ku cu neè yap tu aèmboè má máè cu na.	But I say to the unmarried and to widows, it is good for them if they remain even as I am.
A weèr ce weèr ce suñ beèe buu ca, Yú' Rara ce Nyúè aè fa neè beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè ye, yi ce suñ woweèe foñ.”	"We are His witnesses of these things; and so also is the Holy Spirit, whom God has given to those who obey him."""
Woweèe a duè bguèu baná woweèe a bú' mkaè'ni ce woweèe a m geèe naè, a ká' ñgá' mbe waâp nduè.	having condemnation, because they have rejected their first pledge.
Weèe aè m be be' nlaèa Nyúè ca ka' a? Enáê, ‘Luèr ce ñgaâa boo mndap a m maè', aè m kútïì ba luâr rbuundap.	Haven't you even read this Scripture: 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the head of the corner.
Jisoès aè bipshi neè tar muu enáê, “Muu ca aè m káè' yañ ca aè se'ká?” E beesïì enáê, “Yi m ku ká' aè nfeè' e m bii ñká'.	"He asked his father, ""How long has it been since this has come to him?"" He said, ""From childhood."
Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu Kraâis anaè.” Beèe mo' a ker laa yap enáê, “AÈde' Kraâis anaè vúâ aè ñgoèñ Galeèle ka'.	"Others said, ""This is the Christ."" But some said, ""What, does the Christ come out of Galilee?"
Weèr aè ka' loâ aèfo a kaari a ba' aè rla' Rágïìyoèm. Túè' aè ka' raa, fu' yi ká' a ce vúè embaè mbuèuñgoèñ. Túè' moè' aè ka' raa, weèr aè ba' aè rla' Puètolïì.	From there we circled around and arrived at Rhegium. After one day, a south wind sprang up, and on the second day we came to Puteoli,
Waè' wáè ce wáâ ke yá'ni beèe mo', wáè yá'ni yoè nyor a? Wáè ce wáâ ke yá'ni ená beèe a fa yáèá ka', waè' wáâ ke yáèá a?	You therefore who teach another, don't you teach yourself? You who preach that a man shouldn't steal, do you steal?
Ŋgàa tòʼsi wànmaabuʼ a ke còo ncɛ̀ʼ à nyòr.	The followers of ‘wanmabuh’ juju make marks on the body.
a laa enáê, “Masaè, weèr ce kuushi ená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce ñwáè mbo' beèe ca aè m bii nteèe, e m laèa enáê, ‘Mnoèñ vi be caâa btaar, tá m fúú efa rkwe.’	"saying, ""Sir, we remember what that deceiver said while he was still alive: 'After three days I will rise again.'"
Ncir ce embenjïì yi yu enáê: ‘Koèñ nfúroè aèmboè wáè koèñ yoè nyor.’ Ncir mo' yi yu ce yi caèa bca ka'.”	"The second is like this, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.' There is no other commandment greater than these."""
Jisoès aè ka' karsi nyor yá aèmboè woweèe a ce vúè a yeâ mbuèu, e bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce roèo ba ká?” Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi (ce yi yu ená Ñwáè Ryá'nïì), aè ce cu ba fá?”	"Jesus turned, and saw them following, and said to them, ""What are you looking for?"" They said to him, ""Rabbi"" (which is to say, being interpreted, Teacher), ""where are you staying?"""
Nyor ce aè yú' a yïì ce e ke ba entoèmbïì ka', yïì ce e ke ba entombïì e ke ba nyor ce seèe túr na tá nyor ce aè yú' ka' ba.	However that which is spiritual isn't first, but that which is natural, then that which is spiritual.
Zhe ka tɛ m̀ yɛ.	Eat then so that I can see.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ker vú yi yu a kyese nyor a waâp mú ka', ka' beèe wááwá a m loèr woweèe aè beâe bboèñboñ se wa'a.	None of the rest dared to join them, however the people honored them.
Boo waê, loèr neè nfeè' weèe mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ weèe.	Little children, keep yourselves from idols.
Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo' weèe neè bfee enjep ñgoèñ na, koo weèe aè bkwaèa ka'. Ndeèe to' ker ba mncir ce byú' bebep vi láè, a buu ce vi vúè neè njáèá bfee ca. Ñwáè ce e fa beèe njáèá bfee ca aè fa Jisos Kraâis ka'.	Be careful that you don't let anyone rob you through his philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the elements of the world, and not after Christ.
Wɛ̀ jarsi ŋwàʼ à cicì.	You have wasted that book.
muucɛ̀ʼ [mūː-tʃɛ̀ʔ] cn 1a.	piece of Bikom cloth put around a scabbard or tied under regular clothes [Anth.
Mlùu mi ce koo ye njoʼ wɛ̀ zhiʼshi ye.	He is suffering from suffocation because you have pressed him.
Ñwáè rkeè'ni shañ anaè aè laa ená a bársi mor fa neè ye. A ka' bársi fa neè ye, e cañ a du mbe shañ, a gweè njeptii Pol ba Silaès, a ce kaèñ.	He called for lights and sprang in, and, fell down trembling before Paul and Silas,
Pitaè aè ka' niñ, Koèniyuès aè konïì ye, a gwe njep yeâ tïìi a ca'ni ye aèmboè a ke caè'ni Nyúè naè.	When it happened that Peter entered, Cornelius met him, fell down at his feet, and worshiped him.
Yi yu yáánïì ená seèe gee ñkaè', lu'shi njobeè' nfúroè ca aè m kwe a ker kúti nteèe, e m bú a ker yááti.”’	"But it was appropriate to celebrate and be glad, for this, your brother, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.'"""
Ŋwɛ̀ ce m̀ be fa ye elʉ̀simbùu be yuʼ rbòŋ gòr.	The last, person to whom I will give, will be very happy.
Woweèe a niñ mbe keñ, a du aè dïì' ce beèe a m ba ka'.	They went away in the boat to a deserted place by themselves.
Geewa'a, yi boèñ magoèr ená m cu mbe tunshe njo' weèe.	Yet, to remain in the flesh is more needful for your sake.
Mɛ̀ jɛ̀r nè yaa kùu a du a yɛ ye.	I went there myself and saw him.
Pol aè laa ená a caasi vi mnsa' tá du teni ba Taèr Mañgoèñ, máè laa máná a ku ce ke'ni ye caar tá nfeè' ce m be tuusi ye neè ñkwe Rum ka' gháá.”	"But when Paul had appealed to be kept for the decision of the emperor, I commanded him to be kept until I could send him to Caesar."""
Àdeʼ weewèe foŋ du yɛ.	You too can go and see.
Mɛ̀ fyɛp rfʉ̀ nè mbɛp.	I have blown the feather with air.
Woweèe a du a yá Joân a laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, ñwáè ce weèe ye aè m ba neèñguu rdip Jodaèn, wáè suñ beèe aèmboè ye naè, ñwáè anaè ce baèptir beèe, beèe wááwá a ce duè yeâ mbuèu.”	"They came to John, and said to him, ""Rabbi, he who was with you beyond the Jordan, to whom you have testified, behold, the same baptizes, and everyone is coming to him."""
Baná mbañruèñwáè ce e loèr ñgwa, e geèe yáánïì. Mbañruèñwáè ce e loèr ñgwa ka', e geèe yuu boèñboñ a caa mbañruèñwáè ce e loèr ñgwa.	So then both he who gives his own virgin in marriage does well, and he who doesn't give her in marriage does better.
Baná yi yu ená Nyúè e ke ce ñwáè ba aèmboè ñwáè ce koèñ káè njo' yuu ce ñwáè aè geèe ka'. E ke ce ba njo' yïì ñkoosimnse caè'caè'.	So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who has mercy.
E geèe seèe aè ghááteè aè ñgaâa mfaè' ce a ce feè'shi aèmboè leâ' fi. Leâ' fi ca yi ce laèa ená seèe yu' seè'ni ba ese Yú' Nyúè, ke' yu' ba ese mncir ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ka'. Ncir yi vúè neè rkwe, Yú' Nyúè yi ce fa rluèñ.	who also made us sufficient as servants of a new covenant; not of the letter, but of the Spirit. For the letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
E fúú efa múè rla' a du mbe rtuèu Oleèf aèmboè e m ce duè aè nfeè' wááwá naè. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yeâ mbuèu.	He came out, and went, as his custom was, to the Mount of Olives. His disciples also followed him.
Buu ce woweèe a sañ, ku ba buu ce beèe ce a m ce yá neè map mmir efa rkáè', ce a m ba ñgaâa feè'shi blaâa Nyúè a m suñ weèr.	even as those who from the beginning were eyewitnesses and servants of the word delivered them to us,
Silaès ba Timotïì a ka' vúâ aè rla' Máèsáèdonïìyaè, Pol aè lo seè'ni a ku ce feè'shi ba blaâa Nyúè caè'caè', a ce suñ Jus ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè.	But when Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was compelled by the Spirit, testifying to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ.
Nlaèa ca yu nlaèa mini, rtarnïì li ke' ba njo ka', aè ba nlaèa ce beèe a ba byemi neè yap ntee-ñwá. Nlaèa anaè yi yu ená Jisos Kraâis aè m vúè njep ñgoèñ na aè rgeèe tá ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a luêñ. Ñkúú efa múè beâe bbebep ca yu máè.	The saying is faithful and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief.
tá Jisos Kraâis cu njep weâe mntee aèmboè weèe aè byemi neè ye na. M ce loo máná weèe taa mñgaèñ, táá tatap aè rkoèñnïì,	that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; to the end that you, being rooted and grounded in love,
Fa neè yeè buu wááwá ce mluè mi ce koo weèe aègho mbe yeâ mmboè, njobeè' e túr ntee neè weèe.	casting all your worries on him, because he cares for you.
Beèe Farïìsi a laa neè ye enáê, “Ce suñ wáè aèmboè yo tu; yi ba yáánïì ka'.”	"The Pharisees therefore said to him, ""You testify about yourself. Your testimony is not valid."""
Wáè m duè bguèu mndap taê. Ñwáè ce weèe ye ce cu seè'ni na, a nduu woè ka'. Wáè laèa yuu mini ghup.”	"for you have had five husbands; and he whom you now have is not your husband. This you have said truly."""
Jisoès aè yá taa ce a m leè' neè ye, a laa neè woweèe enáê,	"But he perceived their craftiness, and said to them, ""Why do you test me?"
Jisòs be kèe ruusi mi mŋkàʼni.	Jesus shall fulfil his promises.
Woweèe a be maè' bïìr a muu njeèe Nyúè, tá Muu Njeèe Nyúè so woweèe. E be so woweèe njobeè' e yu ñkúú ce e caèa bkúú wááwá, a ker ba Taèr ce e caèa btaèr wááwá. Muu Njeèe a yïì beèe weèe a be so aèbee. Beèe ca yu beèe ce e ká', a ce, aè ba beèe ce a ce duè a yeâ mbuèu neè ntee e mo'sir.”	"These will war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will overcome them, for he is Lord of lords, and King of kings. They also will overcome who are with him, called and chosen and faithful."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' ye yaè nyor ker no wa bláá baná e be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè. M be keè fúr ye efa rkwe aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu.	He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Yuu ce weèr ce loo neè Nyúè yi yu ená weèe fa geèe yuu bebep ka'. Weèr ce loo wa'a, a ke' ce loo tá beèe a bo yá ená weèr aè so ka'. Weèr ce loo ba ená weèe gee yuu ce yi yu yáánïì, ka' yi ce yááti aèmboè weèr aè lá gweè wa'a.	Now I pray to God that you do no evil; not that we may appear approved, but that you may do that which is honorable, though we are as reprobate.
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená weèe aè ka' fa weêe mnyor neè ñwáè tá weèe bo ce yu'ni neè ñgaèñ aèmboè bkwaèa wa'a, baná weèe yu bkwaèa neè ñwáè ce weèe ce yu'ni neè ye anaè a? Weèe aè ka' fa weêe mnyor aè rgeèe buu bbebep, weèe ba bkwaèa neè buu bbebep, sá' efa gho aè ba rkwe. Weèe aè ka' fa weêe mnyor aè rgeèe ñgeèe ryu'nïì, weèe ba bkwaèa neè ñgeèe ryu'nïì, sá' efa gho yu ená weèe be ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	Don't you know that to whom you present yourselves as servants to obedience, his servants you are whom you obey; whether of sin to death, or of obedience to righteousness?
E gèe yuu e boŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ, mɛ̀ ŋwaa ye.	He did something which did not please me, and I frowned at him.
Ñgaâa Kansuèr a m ker wápsi woweèe, a ma'shi woweèe. Woweèe a m túr njïì aè rgeèe yuu mo' neè Pitaè weèe ka' njobeè' beèe wááwá a m ce kuè'si Nyúè aè yuu ce yi m koni anaè.	When they had further threatened them, they let them go, finding no way to punish them, because of the people; for everyone glorified God for that which was done.
AÈmboè Judaès aè m ba ñwáè ce e m ce láè yap mbaèa naè, beèe mo' a ce kwaè'shi yap ená Jisoès ce laèa ba ená e du yuu buu ñkaè', káè ená e du fa yuu neè ñgaâa fuèp.	"For some thought, because Judas had the money box, that Jesus said to him, ""Buy what things we need for the feast,"" or that he should give something to the poor."
Jisoès aè ka' kuè bii laèa, ñwáè moè' embe ndaèp ñwáâ ñgoèr embe ndaèp rloo aè vúê, a laa enáê, “Muu woè aè kwe. Fa keèr fa ñwáè ryá'nïì ñgá' ka'.”	"While he still spoke, one from the ruler of the synagogue's house came, saying to him, ""Your daughter is dead. Don't trouble the Teacher."""
Saimún Pitaè aè m ku táá a ce yár mor. Beèe mo' a laa neè ye enáê, “Mboè aè yu moè' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu ñwáè anaè foñ a?” Pitaè aè kanïì a laa enáê, “M yu moè' ka'.”	"Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. They said therefore to him, ""You aren't also one of his disciples, are you?"" He denied it, and said, ""I am not."""
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M be bipshi yuu mo' neè weèe foñ. Weèe aè ka' beesïî, baná m be suñ weèe ñwáè ce e fa máè ñger aè rgeèe buu ca.	"Jesus answered them, ""I also will ask you one question, which if you tell me, I likewise will tell you by what authority I do these things."
Geewa'a, woweèe a byemïì yuu ce bbyeèñge ca a m suñ woweèe ka' njobeè' yi m ce yááti neè woweèe ená yuu ce a m suñ anaè aè m ba yuu cicïì.	These words seemed to them to be nonsense, and they didn't believe them.
E lò bkìlò a du ser Bèŋkà.	She has emigrated to Binka.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè, a laa neè njeèndoñ ntatap neè ñwáè ce e m cu mbenduè mmbaè' naè enáê, “Nfeè' ce a be kep buu efa mñkúè aè gháá. Buu ce a byeè njep ñgoèñ na wááwá vi bi. Loèr saè' du kep aègho.”	"Another angel came out from the temple, crying with a loud voice to him who sat on the cloud, ""Send forth your sickle, and reap; for the hour to reap has come; for the harvest of the earth is ripe!"""
Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, ba Tata Jisos Kraêis, fa cumúnyañ neè beèe Nyúè wááwá, gee tá woweèe a koñni, láè ntee neè Jisoès.	Peace be to the brothers, and love with faith, from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Woweèe a m vúè aè ryu' yuu ce e m ce yá'ni, a ker vú foñ tá e bo geèe woweèe a ke'se efa wap byañ. Beèe ce byú' bbebep vi m ce fa woweèe ñgá' a m vúèse foñ, e gee woweèe a ke'seè.	as well as those who were troubled by unclean spirits, and they were being healed.
Yaè ta koèñ máè njobeè' máè fa la ryoèñ tá m bo keèr loè koni li.	Therefore the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, that I may take it again.
Jus wááwá ker ba beèe enje jáá ce a m ce cu aè rla' Áfásoès a m yu' ca, a wáp seê, a naa rlii Tata Jisoès mbekïì seê.	This became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, who lived at Ephesus. Fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
Naèti mbekïì du aè múè rla', tá a bo suñ wáè yuu ce aè be geèe.”	"But rise up, and enter into the city, and you will be told what you must do."""
Mɛ ke kòŋ ŋwɛ̀ taŋshi mtaŋshì kaʼ.	I donʼt like a person who tells lies about others.
Baa zhi ke fa sèe ŋger.	Food gives us strength.
Beèe wááwá a m cu múnyañ a ce yu'shi yuu ce Baènabaès ba Pol a m ce suñ kuu mncoèo ba buu bbáèá ce Nyúè aè m geèe aè múè beèe enje jáá njïì enjep woweèe.	All the multitude kept silence, and they listened to Barnabas and Paul reporting what signs and wonders God had done among the nations through them.
Baná aèmboè yuu bebep ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe yi m geèe beèe wááwá a gwe mnsa' Nyúè naè, yi yu foñ ená yuu yáánïì ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe naè, yi geèe beèe wááwá a konïì fáñ aè rso mnsa', koni ryoèñ.	So then as through one trespass, all men were condemned; even so through one act of righteousness, all men were justified to life.
Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ce e m ba mo' efa ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, ce e m ba ñwáè ce e be loè fyeèni Jisoès naè, aè m laèa enáê,	Then Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, one of his disciples, who would betray him, said,
Ñwáè aè ka' laa ená tu embe cor yi geèe faèa, weèe fa byemi ka'. Geewa'a, beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mtaar áè, a ka' vú suñ ená e geèe faèa ghup weèe ka' byemi.	Don't receive an accusation against an elder, except at the word of two or three witnesses.
Bár ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m vúè yap ba mbe keñ. A ka' ce vúè wa'a, a ce súèñ rraa ce nca yi m ba njo goèr se naè, a ce vúè aègho. Ká' embe dïì' woweèe a m ba anaè du nje waâa roè yi m ba njïìsaèp ka'. Ká' embo naè du nje waâa roè yi m ba aèmboè mkoo mntaê.	But the other disciples came in the little boat (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits away), dragging the net full of fish.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, e nashïì buu moè' mbe ndaèp rloo neè Jus ba neè Greâk ce a m ce loo neè Nyúè. E m geèe wa' foñ aè mnoèñ wááwá aè ntaa neè beèe ce a m vúè aèfo.	So he reasoned in the synagogue with the Jews and the devout persons, and in the marketplace every day with those who met him.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ ená woweèe a koèñ aè rbipshi yuu neè ye, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè laèa enáê, ‘Nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè ka', e keèr ba nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè.’ Waè' a yuu ce weèe ce bipshi a weâe mú a?	"Therefore Jesus perceived that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them, ""Do you inquire among yourselves concerning this, that I said, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me?'"
E m ká' btu mo' a baa ce a m ce faè' njep yeâ tïìi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè bsoogáè mjeâe mmbaa, ba ñgaâa mnyaèabaèraè' msaèambaê, ba ñgaâa mkoèñ mjeâe mmbaa tá weèe woweèe lo neètú' na aè nyúè búè'úê, duè aè rla' Sisaèriyaè.	"He called to himself two of the centurions, and said, ""Prepare two hundred soldiers to go as far as Caesarea, with seventy horsemen, and two hundred men armed with spears, at the third hour of the night."""
Woowèe a koni ye bòŋboŋ sê.	They have welcomed him very well.
E kòŋ kʉʉ sê.	He likes chieftaincy too much.
E yu aèmboè luèr ce weâe ñgaâa mboo mndap aè m maè', aè ka' ba seè'ni, e kútïì ba aè luâr aè rbuu ndap.	He is 'the stone which was regarded as worthless by you, the builders, which has become the head of the corner.'
Rkì rli sɛ̀rti.	The pole has dislocated.
Pitaè aè ker kani. Mú nfeè' aè ka' tuuse, beèe ce a m ba aèfo naè a laa neè Pitaè foñ enáê, “A wáè moè' efa woweèe ghup njobeè' aè yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.”	"But he again denied it. After a little while again those who stood by said to Peter, ""You truly are one of them, for you are a Galilean, and your speech shows it."""
E ka' cúú wáá, a lor mdip a cu'ni njep kañ a ká' a ce suè'si mkuâu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a ce soèr neè baètaèare ce e ba cúú njep mbuèu naè.	Then he poured water into the basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel that was wrapped around him.
Beèe wááwá ce a duè entombïì neè máè, a yu byáèá, njeèe yi máñnïì yaèp njeèndoñ.	All who came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep didn't listen to them.
Woweèe a ka' cu aèfo aè mú mnoèñ mo', Fástoès aè suñ mnsa' Pol neè ñkúú. E m suñ ye enáê, “Ñwáè moè' yu aèfa ce Fálïìs aè m ce duè, a lá aèfa aè ñwáè shañ.	"As he stayed there many days, Festus laid Paul's case before the king, saying, ""There is a certain man left a prisoner by Felix;"
Jisoès aè tuu Pitaè ba Joân, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè fár byee tá seèe bo ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aègho.”	"He sent Peter and John, saying, ""Go and prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat."""
Yi yu boèñboñ ená beèe wááwá a lá mncir ce vi yu nje múè bguèu. Tá mmbañruè a ba mini neè wap bbyeèñge tá bbyeèñge a ba mini neè wap mmbañruè. Nyúè be keè sa' beèe ce a ce koo bduu beèe mo', keèr sa' beèe ce a ce koo bbyeèñge beèe mo'.	Let marriage be held in honor among all, and let the bed be undefiled: but God will judge the sexually immoral and adulterers.
Woweèe a yu aèmboè ma rdip rgoèr ce li ke bañti, mdip mi ce ko' mbekïì ce gweè naè. Yaèp buu bbebep yu aèmboè mghaa ce rdip li fúr mbe waa ñkúè wa'a. Woweèe a yu aèmboè mkaèñsïì ce mi ke táá mbe dïû' mo'sir ka' naè. Nyúè aè kupshi dïì' mo' neè woweèe; faè dïì' anaè ku ba ba túè'nji, aè ba dïì' ce woweèe a be cu nfeseè.	wild waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.
ená e gee rfaè' ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ce Judaès aè m ce faè', a ka' ma'shi a du faèdïì' ce e ba duè.”	"to take part in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas fell away, that he might go to his own place."""
Weèr aè m laèa ba buu ce vi fa weèe ñger keèr geèe tá wee mntee vi ce fúte. Weèr aè m cep weèe ená weèe gee ba ñgeèe ce Nyúâ koèñ. Ku ba ye ce e ká' weèe tá weèe bo ye rboèñ ba foèo efa yi kúú.	to the end that you should walk worthily of God, who calls you into his own Kingdom and glory.
“Ñgaèa ca yu ená, ñgúè buu yu nlaâa Nyúè.	Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God.
AÈmboè yi yu wa'a, seèe aè ka' lor blaèa ce vi yu aèmboè rluèñ ce li vúè ese Nyúè na aètáèr, seèe gee seeká ka' fúú efa ñgá'. Tata Jisoès aè m káè' a suñ beèe blaèa ca, beèe ce a m yu' blaèa ca ese ye a geèe seèe aè riñ ená blaèa anaè vi yu mini.	how will we escape if we neglect so great a salvation--which at the first having been spoken through the Lord, was confirmed to us by those who heard;
Pitaè aè laa enáê, “Máè rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená Nyúè e ke loèr ñwáè moè' jáá ka'.	"Peter opened his mouth and said, ""Truly I perceive that God doesn't show favoritism;"
Yi ka' tá ba wa' ka' baná weèe aè m duè aè ryá ká? Weèe aè m duè aè ryá ñwáè ce e suèsi nyor neè bcáè' yoèo, a? Yi yu wa' ka'. Beèe ce a ke suèsi nyor neè bcáâ' yoèo, a ke cu ba aè mnto'.	But what did you go out to see? A man in soft clothing? Behold, those who wear soft clothing are in king's houses.
E cu à mbèp ce Ndì tɛɛ nà.	There he is on the side where Ndi is standing.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' beèe ca a kani efa rrïìñ Nyúè aèmboè yaèp Nyúè, Nyúè aè ma'shïì woweèe a ce kwaè'shi ba mkwaè'shïû mmbembep tá woweèe a bo geèe buu ce vi yu yáánïì ka' na.	Even as they refused to have God in their knowledge, God gave them up to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not fitting;
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè joèo máè, njobeè' máè yu' aèmboè ñger yi fúú máè enje nyoèr.”	"But Jesus said, ""Someone did touch me, for I perceived that power has gone out of me."""
Ndap Siyuès aè m ba aègee rla'. Ñwáè tañshi tañshïì neè nyúè anaè aè vú neè naè' ba fúèlawaè njep cuâu ñka' njobeè' ye ker ba yïì beèe a m ce koèñ aè rtañshi tañshïì neè ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès.	The priest of Jupiter, whose temple was in front of their city, brought oxen and garlands to the gates, and would have made a sacrifice along with the multitudes.
Woweèe a m loèr yaèp nfeè' a yu' ryá'nïì ce ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraâis a m ce yá'ni, a ce vúè aèbee cá'cá', a ce ye wap byee ker ba byee Nyúè aèbee, a ker ce geèe mloo.	They continued steadfastly in the apostles' teaching and fellowship, in the breaking of bread, and prayer.
Beèe ce a m ce keè'ni rsheè a wáp, a kañ seê, a ba aèmboè bgúâú beèe wa'a.	For fear of him, the guards shook, and became like dead men.
Máâ geèe wa' wáá, laa neè yaè nyor enáê, Wáè túr ku' buu bboèñboñ ce aè be ye aè bfeè' aèñgoo seê. Loèr ñgoèñ aètáèr, yeñger, noñger, yu' rboèñ neè yoè nyor.’	"I will tell my soul, ""Soul, you have many goods laid up for many years. Take your ease, eat, drink, be merry.""'"
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Bkúú beèe enje jáá a ke sa' yap beèe neè ñger- ñwáè, beèe a ce too ñgaâa rsa' anaè ená ñgaâa rjaè'.	"He said to them, ""The kings of the nations lord it over them, and those who have authority over them are called 'benefactors.'"
Seèe riñ ená a ke ce tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì efa múè beèe tá e bo táá aètu beèe kuèntombïì neè Nyúè, koo buu ce beèe a fa neè Nyúè, keèr tañshi btañshïì aètu yaèp buu bbebep.	For every high priest, being taken from among men, is appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
Keèr kwa'shi neè aèmboè ma keñ enjep rdip rgoèr. Fu' tatap yi ka' ce doèo ce duè aègho aè jáá, ñwáè rdoèo ku beesi ba mú co' mo' embe keñ anaè, e du aè njïì ce ñwáè rdoèo ce koèñ.	Behold, the ships also, though they are so big and are driven by fierce winds, are yet guided by a very small rudder, wherever the pilot desires.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba mbe ndap rloo anaè ce yú' bebep yi m ba njep ye. Yú' ana yi m waa, a laa enáê,	Immediately there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit, and he cried out,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè byemi njobeè' wáè yá máè. Bghoènïì vi yu neè beèe ce a yá ka', a ku byemi.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Because you have seen me, you have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed."""
E toshimbì nè mɛ̀.	He is a bit elder than me.
ntáè' Ashaè, ntáè' Naptaleè, ntáè' Maènasïìs,	of the tribe of Asher twelve thousand, of the tribe of Naphtali twelve thousand, of the tribe of Manasseh twelve thousand,
Yi ku ba aèmboè nyor e ke ba moè'sir, mñgúè' nyor vi ku ba jáá jáèá jáá naè. Mñgúè' nyor ca vi ke tarshi nyor aèbee, gee nyor moè'sir. Jisos Kraâis ku ba wa' foñ.	For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of the body, being many, are one body; so also is Christ.
E ka' ye, Sataèn aè niñ njep yeâ ntee. Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Fa caèasi nfeè' ka', geèe yuu ce aè ce koèñ aè rgeèe naè cárcár.”	"After the piece of bread, then Satan entered into him. Then Jesus said to him, ""What you do, do quickly."""
À be vʉ̀ à nǒŋ fɛ?	Which day are you going to come?
Mɛ̌ kwàʼ enɛ e be fʉ vʉ̀ àyàŋsè .	.
Mrùʼ mi ker ba kaʼ njobèʼ mi cetê.	There is no wine because it has stopped flowing.
Ñwáè a ka' gee moè' efa boo bká' ce a byemi neè máè na a gee yuu bebep, baná yi be ba aèndeèe neè ñgaèñ, ce a ka' lor ma luâr ñgoè' baa, cúú ye kuè ndoñ, ma' ye njep rdip rgoèr, tá e no mdip kwe.	but whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him that a huge millstone should be hung around his neck, and that he should be sunk in the depths of the sea.
Byú' ca vi vúè neè bkúú ca aèbee aè dïì' ce a too aè li Jus ená AÈmaègádoèn.	He gathered them together into the place which is called in Hebrew, Megiddo.
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè laèa embe kaèbaèraè' enáê, “Beèe wááwá ce a yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Nyúè, a ce wáp Nyúè foñ naè, a yoñshi yïìseèe Nyúè. Káè yu beâe bgoèrgoèr áè, káè yu beâe bká'ká' áè, yoèñshi neè Nyúè.”	"A voice came forth from the throne, saying, ""Give praise to our God, all you his servants, you who fear him, the small and the great!"""
Yuu ce yaè Ta koèñ yi yu ená ñwáè ce e ka' yá muu yïì, byemi neè ye, baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Be ba aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu, m gee tá ñgaèñ fúú efa rkwe.”	"This is the will of the one who sent me, that everyone who sees the Son, and believes in him, should have eternal life; and I will raise him up at the last day."""
Nsaʼ à bʉ à cicì njobèʼ woowèe a m̀ gèe fàa bsìp.	They have lost the case because they all did wrong.
E du a yá ñwáè embenjïì ñwáâ nlee, a laa yuu ce e ba laa neè ñwáâ nlee naè neè ye. E beesïì a laa enáê, ‘M be duè.’ A ka' laèa wa'a, a du ka'.	He came to the second, and said the same thing. He answered, 'I go, sir,' but he didn't go.
Mɛ̀ tuu muu enɛ e du cete kèŋ.	I have sent the child to close the door.
Tantò yu ŋwɛ̀ jaja.	Tanto is a person who is ignorant of witchcraft.
E naŋsi ndap ce e m boo nà bòŋboŋ sê.	He did very careful work on the house that he built.
Baná weèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' weèe lo kani efa ryu' blaèa ce ñwáè ce e ce laèa neè weèe naè aè m ce feè'shi naè ka'. Beèe eluâuñgoèñ ce a m kani efa ryu' blaèa ce ñwáè ce a m ba njep ñgoèñ na aè m ce feè'shi, a m luèñ efa ñgá' ka'. AÈmboè woweèe a m luèñ efa ñgá' ka', baná aède' seèe ce seèe aè yu' blaâa ñwáè ce e suèu embe buèu, seèe luñ efa ñgá' aè njáâá ká, ce seèe aè ka' kani efa ryu' blaèa anaè.	See that you don't refuse him who speaks. For if they didn't escape when they refused him who warned on the Earth, how much more will we not escape who turn away from him who warns from heaven,
Jisòs à m̀ fʉʉ efa rkwe a du mbe bùu.	Jesus resurrected and went to heaven.
Mɛ̀ cìr yaa bo à ŋkaʼ zhi koʼ.	I have hit my hand against the fence and it has swollen.
Joân aè ka' ce mïìsi li rfaè', a laa enáê, ‘Weèe ce kwaè'shi ená a máè ñwáè anaè a? A máè ye ka'. Ñwáè moè' ce vúè embe máâ njïì, aè ba ñwáè ce máè ghááte aè rbaè'shi vi blaba' ka'.’	As John was fulfilling his course, he said, 'What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. But behold, one comes after me the sandals of whose feet I am not worthy to untie.'
Ñwáè aè ka' bipshi neè weèe enáê, ‘Weèe ce fyáèá jaèaki' anaè njoká?’ weèe suñ ye enáê, ‘Tata ce taè' geèe yuu aègho ka' kúsi.” ’	"If anyone asks you, 'Why are you untying it?' say to him: 'The Lord needs it.'"""
Ñwáè moè' yu ce e láè mncir wááwá tá Nyúè bo laèa ená ñgaèñ yu ñwáâ nyáánïì ka'. Yuu ce mncir vi geèe yi yu ená vi geèe beèe a riñ buu bbebep.	Because by the works of the law, no flesh will be justified in his sight. For through the law comes the knowledge of sin.
a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè niñ aè mndap beèe ce a geèe búè ka', a yeñger weèe woweèe njoká?”	"saying, ""You went in to uncircumcised men, and ate with them!"""
E naa yi bo a duñshi ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aègho, a laa enáê, “Yáê, a yaè ma ba bfúr wa na.	"He stretched out his hand towards his disciples, and said, ""Behold, my mother and my brothers!"
Njáèá bfee ca vi vúè ese Nyúè ka'; yu ba bfee enjep ñgoèñ, aè ba bfee ñwáè ce vi vúè ba ese Sataèn.	This wisdom is not that which comes down from above, but is earthly, sensual, and demonic.
Tantoʼ à m jar nè ŋgwa e caŋ.	Tanto maltreated his wife and she ran away.
Woweèe a m laèa neè weèe ená be ba aè mnoèñ elúèsimbuèu tá beèe a ba ce a be vúèshi weèe. Beèe anaè a be yu'ni neè Nyúè ka', ce geèe ba yuu ce a koèñ aè rgeèe.	"They said to you that ""In the last time there will be mockers, walking after their own ungodly lusts."""
Buu moè' ce weèe ce laèa vi yu bfi neè weèr, weèr aè ce koèñ aè rrïìñ vi.”	"For you bring certain strange things to our ears. We want to know therefore what these things mean."""
Ñwáâ nsoèñ ca aè laa neè Felep enáê, “Suñ laè máè, ñwáè ce ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè anaè ce laèa du kuu ye yu nda? E ce laèa ba aèmboè yïì nyor káè aèmboè ñwáè moè' lá?”	"The eunuch answered Philip, ""Who is the prophet talking about? About himself, or about someone else?"""
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Gú'shi neè Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè, fa' ba neè ye caè'caè'.’ ”	"Jesus answered him, ""Get behind me Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him only.'"""
E be kuè cu mbe buèu caar baè' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè be geèe tá buu wááwá kúti bfi aèmboè e m laèa njïì enjep yi ñgaâa ntuu eluâuñgoèñ ce aè m ba beâe brara naè.	whom heaven must receive until the times of restoration of all things, which God spoke long ago by the mouth of his holy prophets.
Hároèd aè ka' kwe, Josáèf aè yá ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè rlo aè to' Ijïìp.	But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,
Saimún Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “A wáè Kraâis anaè ce e yu Muu Nyúè ce e yu nteèe.”	"Simon Peter answered, ""You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."""
E loo enáê, “Yaè taê, aède' aè gee buu wááwá. Geèe tá ndoñ ñgá' ca caa embe máâ tuè. Geewa'a, ke' ba ená aè gee ba aèmboè m ce koèñ ka', geèe ba aèmboè wáè koèñ.”	"He said, ""Abba, Father, all things are possible to you. Please remove this cup from me. However, not what I desire, but what you desire."""
Beèe mo' efa woweèe a daè' njïì wáá, a du ba aèmbuèu Sataèn.	For already some have turned aside after Satan.
Mɛ̌ kòŋ à rcu fa wàp mʉ̀ kaʼ.	I donʼt like to stay among them.
Beèe anaè a beesïì enáê, “Weèr be túúshi wáè neè bluèr njobeè' buu bboèñboñ ce wáè geèe ka'. Weèr be túúshi wáè neè bluèr njobeè' wáè bepsi rlii Nyúè. AÈ ku ba ba ñwáè, a ce laèa wáná aè yu Nyúè.”	"The Jews answered him, ""We don't stone you for a good work, but for blasphemy: because you, being a man, make yourself God."""
A m kupshi buu mo' bbaa aèmboè bcïìndap Nyúè wa'a, ce vi m ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè, a tooshi mbenduè ñkuèp anaè aè rduèñshi ená Nyúè yu mbe dïì' anaè. Vi m táá aè bgeñ ñkuèp, a búr bbaèp vi tarteè a tá'shi ñkuèp ce Nyúè e ke foèosi buu bbebep beèe mbo. AÈde' weèr suñ weèe buu ca wááwá seè'ni ka'.	and above it cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat, of which things we can't speak now in detail.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe fa ce lu'shi ená mnyúâmkaè' vi yu'ni neè weèe ka', weèe lu'shi ba njobeè' a sañ me mlii mbe buèu.”	"Nevertheless, don't rejoice in this, that the spirits are subject to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven."""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Caè'si neè luèr anaè.” Maataè ce e m ba njar ñkúsheè ñwáè naè, aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, e be rúèú seê, njobeè' yu mnoèñ kyeèe seè'ni aèmboè a mú tuñ ye.”	"Jesus said, ""Take away the stone."" Martha, the sister of him who was dead, said to him, ""Lord, by this time there is a stench, for he has been dead four days."""
njobeè' Jus magoèr a m maè'shi woweèe a byemïì neè Jisoès njo' ye.	because on account of him many of the Jews went away and believed in Jesus.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bipshïì neè ye ená ñgaèa ca yu ba ená ká lá?	"Then his disciples asked him, ""What does this parable mean?"""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Fa wáp neè ka', a máè.”	"But he said to them, ""It is I. Don't be afraid."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe ca ka' baná ñgaèñ yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e feèp wa'a, a ce yá buu ce vi yu aè njïìsaèp ka', a lese yi yu ená Nyúè aè suè'si ye efa faèa ce e m geèe.	For he who lacks these things is blind, seeing only what is near, having forgotten the cleansing from his old sins.
E ka' kúti, a yá aèmboè ñgaâa yá'nïì yïì buu a ce buumi. E laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Saimúèn, aè ce buumi a? AÈde' aè ke' ke'seè mú teèteè ka' a?	"He came and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, ""Simon, are you sleeping? Couldn't you watch one hour?"
Woweèe a bu' cuèu aè cicïì, a ce boèose beèe ce a ce gheèter aè rfúú efa múè beèe ce a ce geèe yuu mini ka', a ce laèa ená woweèe a gee ba yuu ce yaèp nyor koèñ.	For, uttering great swelling words of emptiness, they entice in the lusts of the flesh, by licentiousness, those who are indeed escaping from those who live in error;
Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “Wáâ Nyúè ce ñger wááwá yi yu mba wáâ mmboè, wáè m ba, a ba seè'ni na. Weèr ce yoèñshi wáè njobeè' wáè loèr ku' yo ñger anaè a ká' a ce sa' ñgoèñ aègho.	"saying: ""We give you thanks, Lord God, the Almighty, the one who is and who was; because you have taken your great power, and reigned."
Jisoès aè beesïì nyor a fyá' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Loè efa máâ geñ, Sataèn! Mo mkwaè'shïì yu ba mïû ñwáè, yu mïû Nyúè ka'.”	"But he, turning around, and seeing his disciples, rebuked Peter, and said, ""Get behind me, Satan! For you have in mind not the things of God, but the things of men."""
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè Nyúè, e duèñshi seèe ená e koèñ seèe seê, njobeè' aè m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ku bii ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep naè, Kraâis aè kwe a seâe btuè.	But God commends his own love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe be no enjep ndoñ ce m be no enjo ghup. Ka' yi yu wa'a, máè túr ñger aè rlaèa ená ñwáè cu a máâ bo maè' káè a máâ bo ñkoèp ka'. Bdïì' anaè vi yu ba neè beèe ce yaè Ta aè m kupshi a lá neè woweèe.”	"He said to them, ""You will indeed drink my cup, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with, but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but it is for whom it has been prepared by my Father."""
Woowèe a sìi ye nè baa enɛ e zhe, e kanì.	They have forced him with food that he should eat and he has refused.
Ka' cu ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè nyáêá, rraa li raa mbe múè shañ; e lipshïì Pitaè neè bo aè gee nyor, a yáá ye efa mmirloè a laa enáê, “Naèti mbekïì cárcár.” Bkwaèñ caè vi m gweèñger efa yeâ mkoo.	"And behold, an angel of the Lord stood by him, and a light shone in the cell. He struck Peter on the side, and woke him up, saying, ""Stand up quickly!"" His chains fell off from his hands."
Woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rduè ba aè rla' ce li boèñ a caa faèdïì' ce woweèe a m ce cu. Rla' anaè yu lïì embe buèu. Baná woweèe a ka' too Nyúè ená yaèp Nyúè, rïìtu yi ke' koo Nyúè neè woweèe ka'. Seèe rïìñ wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè kupshi rla' a lá neè woweèe.	But now they desire a better country, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for he has prepared a city for them.
E ke koosimnse neè beèe ce a ce wáp ye ká' embe ñgúè beèe moè' du ba' mbe moè'.	His mercy is for generations of generations on those who fear him.
Blaèa aèmboè Tata ce vi loè ese weèe vi ku ba' ba aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ba aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè ka', beâe aè bto' wááwá a yu' aèmboè le rbyemïì ce weèe túr neè Nyúè. Yi ka' ba wa'a, yuu mo' ce aède' weèr ker suñ beèe aèmboè weèe yi yu ka'.	For from you the word of the Lord has been declared, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith toward God has gone out; so that we need not to say anything.
M ce loo máná Taèr Nyúè ba Tata Jisos Kraâis a túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “M be geèe tá bfee ñgaâa bfee vi bú aè cicïì. M be geèe tá beèe ce a feese, a jep.”	"For it is written, ""I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, I will bring the discernment of the discerning to nothing."""
“Weèe yu mgwañ enjep ñgoèñ na. Ka' yi yu wa'a, mgwañ mi ka' cir, aède' a gee eká mi ka' ker leêe? Mi be keèr ba yuu ñgeèe yuu ka', tá a cu' tá beèe a ce caèa ce nyáèñshi neè mkuèu.	"You are the salt of the earth, but if the salt has lost its flavor, with what will it be salted? It is then good for nothing, but to be cast out and trodden under the feet of men.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	14	Weèe yu rraa enjep ñgoèñ na. A ka' ba'ri rla' mbe rtuèu, aède' beèe a buu efa ryá li ka'.	You are the light of the world. A city located on a hill can't be hidden.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	15	Yi yu foñ ená aède' ñwáè cú' laêm, lor ghee kúpshi aègho ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' cú' laêm, baná e be tár ba mbe tábuèr tá ndap bo raa neè beèe wááwá ce a yu mbe ndaèp.	Neither do you light a lamp, and put it under a measuring basket, but on a stand; and it shines to all who are in the house.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	16	Baná wee weèe ma'shi tá le rraa li raa aè bsii beèe, tá woweèe a bo yá me mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ, kuè'si yeè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu.	Even so, let your light shine before men; that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	17	“Weèe fa ce kwaè'shi ená máè vúè aè rsiñsi mncir ker ba yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa ka'. Máè vúè aè rsiñsïì ka'. Máè vúè ba aè rgeèe tá buu embe mñwaè' anaè vi bo ghááte njo.	Don't think that I came to destroy the law or the prophets. I didn't come to destroy, but to fulfill."
Seèe rïìñ wáá ená Joshuèwaè aè m loèr viseèe btarkú a du aègho aè to' Kánaèn. To' Kánaèn anaè aè m ba ba dïû' rlúèshïì anaè, Nyúè aè m ba ker laa aèmboè nfeè' rlúèshïì ce e bii ka' ba ka'.	For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken afterward of another day.
Yɛ ma ce ca.	See this big tree.
Bwap bvi yû?	You have shown us a bed.
Ke' ba ená m ce laèa njobeè' yuu mo' yi buu máè ka'; máè lááte aè rcu, mú yïì ce máè túr yi ghááteè máè.	Not that I speak in respect to lack, for I have learned in whatever state I am, to be content in it.
Muu ñwáè be kuè duè aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè naè. Ka' yi yu wa'a, ndoèo be co' ñwáè ce e be fyeèni ye. Yi yu aèndeèe neè ñwáè anaè ená a m ba bi ye ka'.”	"The Son of Man goes, even as it is written of him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born."""
Baná weèe aè rïìñ, a byemi yuu ce weêe bta a m geèe. Woweèe a m yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, weèe aè ce boo ye ba msheè.	So you testify and consent to the works of your fathers. For they killed them, and you build their tombs.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Mboè ntee yi ba ce luèu soè se aè nfeè' ce e ba ce laèa neè soè aè nduunjïì, a ce naèshi yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa naè a?”	"They said one to another, ""Weren't our hearts burning within us, while he spoke to us along the way, and while he opened the Scriptures to us?"""
M ce yoèñshi Nyúè njobeè' m ce laèa bli ce máè m be yá'ni ka', a caa weèe wááwá.	I thank my God, I speak with other languages more than you all.
Bkar waê, seèe yu boo Nyúè seè'ni. Yuu ce seèe be keè ba yi be yááti neè seèe ka'. Geewa'a seèe yi ená be keè ba aè nfeè' ce e vúè tá seèe feese ye njobeè' seèe be keè yá ye aèmboè e yu.	Beloved, now we are children of God, and it is not yet revealed what we will be. But we know that, when he is revealed, we will be like him; for we will see him just as he is.
Ka' e m ce koèñ aè ryú Joân wa'a, geewa'a njïì yi buêu, njobeè' beèe anaè a m byemi ená Joân yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	When he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude, because they counted him as a prophet.
Jus a m ce roèo ye aè ñkaè' anaè, a ce bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè anaè yu fá?”	"The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, ""Where is he?"""
Woowèe a rìŋ à rbii bii gòr njobè woowèe a m lòr ba àtʉʼ.	They know how to dance very well because they acquired it mysteriously.
Woweèe a ka' yá ye ka', a kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè rroèo ye.	When they didn't find him, they returned to Jerusalem, looking for him.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a vúê, a yá ye, a bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr seê mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè yu nda?”	"In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, ""Who then is greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven?"""
Ñwáè anaè e ke geèe ñgeâe bebep neè beèe ka', e ke weti ka', e ke cápñger ka', e ke láè yuu bebep njep ntee ka'.	doesn't behave itself inappropriately, doesn't seek its own way, is not provoked, takes no account of evil;
Pitaè aè laa enáê, “Beèe ca wááwá a ka' ma' wáè, m ma' wáè ka'.”	"But Peter answered him, ""Even if all will be made to stumble because of you, I will never be made to stumble."""
Pol ba Baènabaès a ka' ce fúú embe ndaèp rloo, beèe anaè a bu' mmbo neè woweèe ená woweèe a ker vú aè mmbomntaa Nyúè ekoâ ker suñ woweèe buu anaè.	So when the Jews went out of the synagogue, the Gentiles begged that these words might be preached to them the next Sabbath.
Wɛ̀ càaca ntìni gòr.	You have been moving up and down today too much.
Sol aè m ku bii ce wápsi beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Tata Jisoès ená e be yúshi woweèe. E m duè a yá tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì,	But Saul, still breathing threats and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, went to the high priest,
Ñwáè ce e ka' ba yïìseèe ñwáè bbaèa ka', baná e yu yïìseèe ñwáè.	For whoever is not against us is on our side.
Yi m ku ba aè nfeè' yïì Lot wa' foñ. Beèe a m ce ye buu, a ce no buu, a ce yuu buu, a ce fyeèni buu, a ce byeè buu, a ce baè'ri mndap.	Likewise, even as it happened in the days of Lot: they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built;
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ moè' aè suèu embe buèu a laa enáê, “Fúú neè efa múè rla' anaè yaè beèe. Fúú neè faè dïì' weèe rla' ca weèe lo cú' mmbo tá wee weèe foñ lo geèe buu bbebep ka'. Fúú neè faè dïì' wee weèe foñ lo yá ñgá' ce a be fa neè rla' anaè ka'.	"I heard another voice from heaven, saying, ""Come out of her, my people, that you have no participation in her sins, and that you don't receive of her plagues,"
Woweèe a ye a yu', a baashi bbábá' ce vi m báti, vi ruu aè mñkaèa saèambaê.	They ate, and were filled. They took up seven baskets of broken pieces that were left over.
M ce sañ cena neè weèe du kuu beèe ce a ce roèo aè rbo' weèe.	These things I have written to you concerning those who would lead you astray.
Njeñwáè moè' aè m ba aèfo ce e m cu mbe kuèu aè bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, ñwáè mcáèp moè' aè ke' ba ce aède' e m ba kupshi ye e ke'se ka'.	A woman who had a flow of blood for twelve years, who had spent all her living on physicians, and could not be healed by any,
AÈde' ñwáè moè' ker boo kuèundap mo' jáá caa efa yïì ce a boo war ce yu Jisos Kraâis na ka'.	For no one can lay any other foundation than that which has been laid, which is Jesus Christ.
“Ñkúú Agripaè, máè yá máná máè koni rboâñtu ntïìni na aè rtáá a wáâ bsii laèa yuu kuu buu wááwá ce Jus a laèa kuu máè.	"I think myself happy, King Agrippa, that I am to make my defense before you this day concerning all the things that I am accused by the Jews,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	3	Yi yu wa' ghup njobeè' wáè rïìñ ndeèe to' Jus ker ba buu ce woweèe a ke sár mnsár aètu mo, baná m ce bu' mmbo neè wáè ená aè kur ntee yu'shi yuu ce m be laèa.	especially because you are expert in all customs and questions which are among the Jews. Therefore I beg you to hear me patiently.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	4	Jus wááwá a rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce máè m ba, ká' embe nfeè' máè m ba ghaèrñwáè a ce cu a máâ to' ker ba aè nfeè' ce máè m ce cu aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	Indeed, all the Jews know my way of life from my youth up, which was from the beginning among my own nation and at Jerusalem;"
Weèr ce loo neè Nyúè neètú' ba neèmootïì ená e fa weèr fáñ tá weèr vúê, tá seèe yáni, tá weèr yá'ni weèe buu moè' ce weèe aè be riñ ka' naè, tá le rbyemïì li bo ruusi.	night and day praying exceedingly that we may see your face, and may perfect that which is lacking in your faith?
À kaʼ ce no mrùʼ, à no àndèe.	If you are drinking wine, drink within limits.
E m yu' aèmboè Pol ce laèa. Pol aè ke' ye a yá ená e túr njáèá rbyemïì ce aède' li gee ye e jáêr.	He was listening to Paul speaking, who, fastening eyes on him, and seeing that he had faith to be made whole,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, yïì beèe ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu a lor ye neètú', a lá njep ma ñkaèa moè', a torsi njïû aè wenduè ñka', a suusi njep nsheè.	but his disciples took him by night, and let him down through the wall, lowering him in a basket.
Tɛɛ m̀ vʉ̂.	Hold on I am coming.
Waè' beèe wááwá a yu ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a? Waè' beèe wááwá a yu ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a? Waè' beèe wááwá a yu ñgaâa ryá'nïì a? Waè' beèe wááwá a yu ñgaâa rgeèe buu bghagha' a?	Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Are all miracle workers?
Btu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ca a m ce tañshi aè mnoèñ wááwá. Woweèe a m ce káè' be tañshi aètu yaèp buu bbebep wáá, ka' tañshi aètu buu bbebep beèe. Jisoès aè m tañshi tañshïì yi ba aè njáâá wa' ka'. E m tañshi yi nfeè' moè'sir yi ku mi wa'a. E m tañshi tañshïì anaè ba aè nfeè' ce e m fa yïì nyor, a kwe a seâe btuè naè.	who doesn't need, like those high priests, to offer up sacrifices daily, first for his own sins, and then for the sins of the people. For he did this once for all, when he offered up himself.
E ka' joèo cáè' Jisoès, yañ ca yi ku borni, e ku yu' nje yeâ nyoèr ená e keè'se.	Immediately the flow of her blood was dried up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' beèe a ce cáp weèe aèwañ a ker ce fa weèe ñgá'. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' weèe aè ba aè múè beèe moè' ce a m ce yá njáèá ñgá' ca foñ.	partly, being exposed to both reproaches and oppressions; and partly, becoming partakers with those who were treated so.
Muunje ca à ghɛɛ ce e ba dù bgùu.	This girl is mature enough to get married.
Jisoès aè duè a niñ mbe dïû' rara anaè entombïì neè seèe a táá mbo a seâe btuè, a ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì nfeseè aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba naè.	where as a forerunner Jesus entered for us, having become a high priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
E ka' niñ mbe ndaèp, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aè ku ba Jisoès a woweèe, woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè ba moo a rfúr yú' anaè enjep ye laèr njoká?”	"When he had come into the house, his disciples asked him privately, ""Why couldn't we cast it out?"""
Ñwáè aè ka' yá'ni yïì nyor aè rgeèe mcáâr, mú sá' ku ba njo. Geewa'a, ñwáè aè ka' yá'ni yïì nyor aè rkwaè'shi ba aèmboè buu Nyúè, sá' ba njo aè buu wááwá njobeè' njáèá mkwaè'shïì ca mi kaè'ni seèe rcu rboèñboñ seè'ni na, ker ba rcu rboèñboñ aè nfeè' ce e bii ka' ba.	For bodily exercise has some value, but godliness has value in all things, having the promise of the life which is now, and of that which is to come.
AÈmboè seèe yu yi seèe beèe ce seèe ce cu ba aè rraa, baná seèe tami nyor. Seèe tá'shi viseèe mnyor aèmboè bsoogáè a ke tá'shi wap mnyor aè ñkúè bïìr naè. Seèe lá viseèe mntee njep Nyúè, ker koñ ye foñ tá cena yi bo ba aèmboè kañ ce seèe aè tá'shi viseèe mñguèñ aègho. Yi yu foñ ená aèmboè seèe cu a ce keè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be jaè' seèe, cena yi yu neè seèe aèmboè rtaa bco' ce seèe aè soèp mbe tuè tá li bo tá'shi tu wa'a.	But let us, since we belong to the day, be sober, putting on the breastplate of faith and love, and, for a helmet, the hope of salvation.
E laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Weèe ce wáp ba ká wa'a? Weèe aè be túr rbyemïì ka' a?”	"He said to them, ""Why are you so afraid? How is it that you have no faith?"""
Nyúè aè m bepsi ñgoèñ eluâuñgoèñ ba neè mdip aè nfeè' ce mi m ruu a cete ñgoèñ dúèdúè naè.	by which means the world that then was, being overflowed with water, perished.
Mú nfeè' moè' aè ka' tuuse, beèe mo' efa múè beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a vú a yá Jisoès, a bipshi neè ye enáê,	Then Pharisees and scribes came to Jesus from Jerusalem, saying,
Buu wááwá aè m loè ese Nyúè, buu anaè wááwá aè ba aègho njo' ye, buu wááwá aè ba yïì buu. Tá beèe a ku'si ye nfeè' sïìp! Yi yu wa'a.	For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things. To him be the glory for ever! Amen.
To máè m ku ce yá'ni weèe mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá. Weèe aè ke' koo máè mbo ka'. Geewa'a, tá yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa yi ghááte njo.”	"I was daily with you in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me. But this is so that the Scriptures might be fulfilled."""
Rbyemïì li m geèe beèe Isráèl a jár a kaari to' Jáèrikuè aè noèñ aè noèñ, mnoèñ vi ka' ba saèambaê, ñka' aè to' anaè yi káátïì.	By faith, the walls of Jericho fell down, after they had been encircled for seven days.
Geèe neè le rfaè' neè ntee boèñboñ. Weèe fa geèe aèmboè weèe ku ce faè' ba neè ñwáè wa' ka', weèe gee li ba neè Tata Jisos Kraêis.	with good will doing service, as to the Lord, and not to men;
a laa enáê, ‘Koèniyuès, Nyúè aè yu' lo rloo a yá ená aè yu mmbo mtoo, a ce kuushi wáè.	and said, 'Cornelius, your prayer is heard, and your gifts to the needy are remembered in the sight of God.
Nzhɛ̀ɛ à bapni a zhɛɛ mbàa.	The thief has gone secretly and stolen money.
Woweèe a ka' baè' nje w a roè, fúú embe keñ, a yá mor, a yá bráâd, a yá nca njep mor anaè.	So when they got out on the land, they saw a fire of coals there, and fish laid on it, and bread.
E kòŋ ŋgwa zhì sê.	He loves his wife very much.
Yi yu mini ená Jisos Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe. Efa múè beèe ce a m kweñger, a ye ce e m káè' a fúú efa rkwe.	But now Christ has been raised from the dead. He became the first fruits of those who are asleep.
E laa enáê, ‘Nyúè yïì viseèe btarkú aè ce wáè tá aè bo rïìñ yuu ce e ce koèñ ená aè geêe, keèr yá yïì Ñwáè Rfaâ' Nyáánïì, yu' aèmboè e ce laèa,	He said, 'The God of our fathers has appointed you to know his will, and to see the Righteous One, and to hear a voice from his mouth.
Ñwáè anaè aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Koèñ Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè neè yo ntee-ñwáè, ba neè lo ryoèñ-ñwáè, ba neè yo ñger wááwá, ba neè wo bfee wááwá, ker koñ nfúroè aèmboè wáè koèñ yoè nyor.”	"He answered, ""You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, with all your strength, and with all your mind; and your neighbor as yourself."""
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na ce weèe aè luèñ efa buu bbebep a ba bkwaèa neè Nyúè na, sá' efa gho yu ená weèe yu beèe Nyúè ce weèe yu brara, loè koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	But now, being made free from sin, and having become servants of God, you have your fruit of sanctification, and the result of eternal life.
M ce suñ weèe máná be keè ba aè noèñ anaè tá ñgá' yïì beâe aè rla' Sodoèm ba aèndeèe neè ñgá' yïì beâe aè rla' anaè.	I tell you, it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that city.
Yuʼ zhi bàŋri.	The banana has become a little ripe.
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè koo mor embe dïì' ce a ke fa rfa, a lá njep rkïìñ anaè a ma' njep ñgoèñ. E ka' maè', mbeèñ aè rúúñgeèr, a bapñger, a wañger, nshe aè ci'tïì.	The angel took the censer, and he filled it with the fire of the altar, and threw it on the earth. There followed thunders, sounds, lightnings, and an earthquake.
Mncir Nyúè vi ce laèa enáê, “Fa koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè' ka', fa yú ka', fa yáèá ka', fa gani ka'.” Mncir ca wááwá ker ba mncir mo' vi táá ba mbenduè ncir e mo'sir. Ncir anaè yi yu enáê, “Koèñ nfúroè aèmboè wáè koèñ yoè nyor.”	"For the commandments, ""You shall not commit adultery,"" ""You shall not murder,"" ""You shall not steal,"" ""You shall not give false testimony,"" ""You shall not covet,"" and whatever other commandments there are, are all summed up in this saying, namely, ""You shall love your neighbor as yourself."""
Beèe ce a koèñ aè rkuè' aè buu a lo gwe rmoèoshïì, kwe aè taa. Taa ce woweèe a loè kwe aègho na, yu ba buu ce woweèe a koèñ neè blúr-ñwáè, ñgá' aè ba njo. Buu ce woweèe a koèñ neè blúr-ñwáè na yu buu ce vi ke suèusi beèe njep nsheè, bepsi woweèe dúèdúè.	But those who are determined to be rich fall into a temptation and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts, such as drown men in ruin and destruction.
E beesïì neè woweèe ená, “Yaè ma a nda? Bfúr wa aè ba weèe ká?”	"He answered them, ""Who are my mother and my brothers?"""
Woweèe a ka' yá ye neèñguu túè, a laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, wáè vúè aèfa aè se'ká?”	"When they found him on the other side of the sea, they asked him, ""Rabbi, when did you come here?"""
Woweèe a geèe yuu ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa naè yi ghááteè njo. E m laèa enáê, ‘Beèe ca a be ce yu', ce rïìñ yuu ce woweèe a ce yu' anaè ka'. Woweèe a be ce yá, ce rïìñ yuu ce a ce yá anaè ka',	In them the prophecy of Isaiah is fulfilled, which says, 'By hearing you will hear, and will in no way understand; Seeing you will see, and will in no way perceive:
Nyúè be laè' beèe ce a ce geèe buu bbebep aè buu bbebep anaè. E ke so'niñgoèñ ka'.	But he who does wrong will receive again for the wrong that he has done, and there is no partiality.
“Weèe fa sa' beèe mo' ka', tá a bo sa' weèe ka',	"Don't judge, so that you won't be judged.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	2	njobeè' njáèá njïì ce weèe ce sa' beèe mo' ku ba njáèá njïì ce a be keèe sa' weèe. Njáèá njïì ce weèe aè geèe yuu neè beèe mo' ku ba njáèá njïì ce a be geèe neè weèe foñ.	For with whatever judgment you judge, you will be judged; and with whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	3	Wáè maè'shi ntaañguu nje rlïìr njep wáè, a ce fyá' ba ñkúè' ce ce yi yu nfúroè nje rlïìr njoká?	Why do you see the speck that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	4	AÈde' aè laa neè nfúroè enáê, ‘Naèa rlir tá m koo wáè ñkúè' ce enjo,’ ce ntaañguu yu wáè nje rlïìr, aè njáâá ká?	Or how will you tell your brother, 'Let me remove the speck from your eye;' and behold, the beam is in your own eye?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	5	Wáè ce aè yu ñwáè mbo'ni, fúr ntaañguu ce e yu nje rlïìr nje wáè wáá, tá aè bo yá ñkúè' ce ce yi yu nje rlïìr nje nfúroè boèñboñ, ka' fúr.	You hypocrite! First remove the beam out of your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck out of your brother's eye.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	6	Fa fa yuu ce yi yu rara aè bsii Nyúè neè ñgwe ka'. Fa maè' yo yuu boèñboñ se neè ñkuânyaèm ka'. Wáè ka' ma' neè ñkuânyaèm baná ñkuânyaèm yi be nyáèñshi neè mkuèu, beèeñger koo wáè, ceeshi aè btete aè btete.	Don't give that which is holy to the dogs, neither throw your pearls before the pigs, lest perhaps they trample them under their feet, and turn and tear you to pieces."
Wáè teèe tu, a kani efa rkupseè, baná aè ce keè' seè'ni ba rshentee Nyúè ce li be keè yááti aèwañ aè noèñ ce e be keè sa' beèe wááwá aè njïû yáánïì naè.	But according to your hardness and unrepentant heart you are treasuring up for yourself wrath in the day of wrath, revelation, and of the righteous judgment of God;
Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, ker ba Tata Jisos Kraêis, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Wèr à dù a koo ŋgwagùu nè yer bo.	We went and too the bride ourselves.
AÈmboè seèe táá njep mini ba rkoèñnïì Nyúè, m ce loo máná Nyúè Taèr, ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Muu Taèr ghoni seèe, koosimnse neè seèe, ker fa seèe cumúnyañ.	Grace, mercy, and peace will be with us, from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
E m loè embo, a du a niñ mbe yaèp ndap rloo.	He departed there, and went into their synagogue.
Ca yi m ba wa'a, tá yuu ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa yi bo ghááte njo. E m laèa enáê, “E m koo viseèe bsáè, a ker byá' viseèe byañ.”	"that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying: ""He took our infirmities, and bore our diseases."""
Káè ñwáè aè geèe búè áè, káè ñwáè aè geèe búè ka' áè, yïì anaè yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe ka'. Yuu ce yi yu goèr yi yu ba ená ñwáè lá mncir Nyúè.	Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the commandments of God.
Njeŋwè ce e tɛɛ kùna na feese njar yàa.	That woman standing over there resembles my sister.
Máè yá máná yi yu boèñboñ ená m tuu nfúr yïìseèe ce ÁÈpafroèditoès tá e kúti vúè yá weèe. E yu ñwáè ce weèr ye ce faè' aèbee, a ce maè' bïìr Nyúè aèbee. E yu foñ ñwáè ntuu ce weèe aè m tuu ená e vú ja' máè.	But I counted it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother, fellow worker, fellow soldier, and your apostle and servant of my need;
M ce fa ñgá' neè yaè nyor, a gee e kútïì aè ñkwaèa faè dïì' m ce feè'shi neè beèe moè', loè gweè, bá blaè' ka'.	but I beat my body and bring it into submission, lest by any means, after I have preached to others, I myself should be rejected.
Musïìs aè m laèa enáê, ‘Yu'ni neè yoè ta ba yoè maê.’ A ker laa enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce e ka' cáp yïì ta káè yïì ma áè, baná a be yú ñgaèñ.’	For Moses said, 'Honor your father and your mother;' and, 'He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.'
E ka' laèa neè woweèe wa'a, a cu yi yu aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	Having said these things to them, he stayed in Galilee.
A m taa Jisoès mbe kïìntaa aè nyúè búè'ú aè ñgaèptú'.	It was the third hour, and they crucified him.
Yi yu ená faèdïì' ce yeè buu yu, a faèdïì' ce ye ntee yi yu foñ.	For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Yáê, nfúroâ ÁÈlisabáèt aè koo rbúè aè nfeè' ce e yu nleeñwáè seê. Ñwáè ce a m ce too ená kar yu neè rbúè seè'ni aè mñwáá ntuunfu.	Behold, Elizabeth, your relative, also has conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
Ñwáè ce e baèa nfúr yïì yu aè túè'nji, a ce jáèr aè túè'nji, a ke' yi faèdïì' e ce duè ka', njobeè' túè'nji aè beèesi ye aè nfeèp.	But he who hates his brother is in the darkness, and walks in the darkness, and doesn't know where he is going, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
Pol aè kar nyo ca efa boè, e gwe njep mor, yuu mo' yi gee ye ka'.	However he shook off the creature into the fire, and wasn't harmed.
“Weèe rïìñ weená ku báti mnoâñ bbaa tá a ye ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap. A be koo Muu Ñwáè fa neè beèe tá a taa mbe kïìntaa.”	You know that after two days the Passover is coming, and the Son of Man will be delivered up to be crucified.
Ñwáè ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr yu ba nda? Yu ba ñwáè ce e ye byee káè yu ba ñwáè ce e ce caèasi byee neè ye aè? Mboè yu ñwáè ce e ce ye byee a? M yu ya fa weâe mú aèmboè ñwáè rfaè'.	For who is greater, one who sits at the table, or one who serves? Isn't it he who sits at the table? But I am in the midst of you as one who serves.
Mboè weèe aè be be' foñ mbe ñwaè' mncir ená ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì embe Ndaèp Nyúè a ke bú' ncir mmbomntaa Nyúè ke' ba faèa neè woweèe ka' a?	Or have you not read in the law, that on the Sabbath day, the priests in the temple profane the Sabbath, and are guiltless?
Mnoèñ vi ka' caâa btaar woweèe a yá ye mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aèmboè e cu mbe múè ñgaâa ryá'nïì, a ce yu'shi buu ce woweèe a m ce yá'ni, a ce bipshi buu neè woweèe.	It happened after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both listening to them, and asking them questions.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni njobeè' weèe aè boo msheâ mmboèñmboñ neè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, ba beèe ce a m ce cu rcu yáánïì, a kupshi mi, mi ba yáánïì.	"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and decorate the tombs of the righteous,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	30	A laa weenáê, ‘Weèr aè m ba ba aè ñgoèñ aè nfeè' ce weêr bta a m ba naè, weèr aè m ba cú' mmbo weèr woweèe, yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ka'.’	and say, 'If we had lived in the days of our fathers, we wouldn't have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	31	Baná weèe ce laèa weená weèe yu boo beèe ce a m yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè.	Therefore you testify to yourselves that you are children of those who killed the prophets.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	32	Geèe neè yuu ce weêe bta a m káè' a ce geèe naè, misi yi.	Fill up, then, the measure of your fathers.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	33	Weèe ce weèe yu aèmboè mnyo, a ba boo bfïî, weèe be geèe weeká ka' cañ ñgá' mor?	You serpents, you offspring of vipers, how will you escape the judgment of Gehenna?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	34	Baná m ce tuu ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè neè weèe, ba ñgaâa bfee, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, tá weèe yúshi beèe mo' efa woweèe, taa beèe mo' mbe kïìntaa, lïìp beèe mo' efa woweèe aè wee mndap mloo, fa woweèe ñgá' aè mla' jáá jáèá jáá,	Therefore, behold, I send to you prophets, wise men, and scribes. Some of them you will kill and crucify; and some of them you will scourge in your synagogues, and persecute from city to city;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	35	tá weèe yá ñgá' njo' beèe ce a yúshi aè cicïì njep ñgoèñ na, ká' embe nfeè' ce a m yú Ábáèl ce e m geèe faèa ka' naè, du ba' aè nfeè' ce weèe aè m yú Saèkaèriyaè muu Baèraèkuyaè mbetar dïû' rara ba dïû' ntoèo rfa embe Ndaèp Nyúè naè.	that on you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom you killed between the sanctuary and the altar.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	36	M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñgá' be koni ñgúè beèe ce e seè'ni na njo' buu ca.	Most certainly I tell you, all these things will come upon this generation.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	37	“Jáèrusaláèm, Jáèrusaláèm, wee ke yúshi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, a ce túúshi beèe ce a tuu ená a vú yá weèe neè bluèr, yu nfeè' sá' ce máè koèñ aè rbaashi boo wee aèmboè mañgúp e ke ku'ri boo naè, weèe aè koñ ka'.	Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her! How often I would have gathered your children together, even as a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and you would not!"
Mɛ̀ kèse kwâa zhìi ba yàa a du àgho.	I have added his corn to mine and have gone with it.
AÈde' ñwáè cu njáèá rcu ca njobeè' e ce keè' ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Tá ñgoèñ yi ka' keè ba, Nyúè ce e ke nya' mnde' ka' aè m kaè' ená e be fa beèe njáèá ryoèñ ca.	in hope of eternal life, which God, who can't lie, promised before time began;
Mɛ̀ vʉ̀ àfa njobèʼ mɛ̀ kòŋ rfàʼ ca.	I came here because I love this work.
E bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weâe koèñ ená m fúr ñkúú Jus fa neè weèe a?”	"Pilate answered them, saying, ""Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?"""
Lúr caê, wáâ roèo ená m duñshi wáè ená rbyemïì ce li buu ñgeâe boèñboñ li yu aè cicïì a?	But do you want to know, vain man, that faith apart from works is dead?
Wáâ Taèr, kuè'si laè máè seè'ni a wáâ bsii neè bkuè' ce máè m túr weèe soè tá ñgoèñ yi ka' ba.	Now, Father, glorify me with your own self with the glory which I had with you before the world existed.
Yi ker joo Jisoès, e du mbe dïì' ce rsheè li m ba. Rsheè anaè aè m ba mbúè' ce a m soè' nje ryáá, a biñsi luèr a cete aègho.	Jesus therefore, again groaning in himself, came to the tomb. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it.
Yeèr taê, ñwáè ce aède' e wáp wáè ka', yu nda? Ñwáè ce aède' e buu efa rkuè'si lo rlii yu nda? Ñwáè ce e yu nrara ku ba wáè caè'caè'. Beâe aè bto' wááwá a be vúè gú'shi neè wáè, njobeè' a yá ená buu wááwá ce aè ce geèe vi yu yáánïì.”	"Who wouldn't fear you, Lord, and glorify your name? For you only are holy. For all the nations will come and worship before you. For your righteous acts have been revealed."""
Jisoès aè ka' tuu neèñguu roè, ba seè'ni ba aè ñgoèñ beèe Gáèrasaè, a yá beèe a mmbaa ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m ba njep woweèe, aèmboè a ce vúè efa dïì' ce a m ce tuñ beèe. Woweèe a m ce fa ñgá' se aèmboè mñgaèa-baa wa', ñwáè aè ker ce baèp njep nduunjïì ce yi m caèa aè dïì' anaè ka'.	When he came to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, two people possessed by demons met him there, coming out of the tombs, exceedingly fierce, so that nobody could pass that way.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa laèa ená ñgaèñ borni ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' gee rfaâ' rghagha' fa máâ rlii baná aède' e laa yuu bebep kuu máè ka'.	"But Jesus said, ""Don't forbid him, for there is no one who will do a mighty work in my name, and be able quickly to speak evil of me."
Bkúr beèe ca a ka' yu' yuu ce Felep aè m laèa, keèr yá mncoèo ce e m duèñshi, a ker lor nfeè' a yu'shi boèñboñ seê.	The multitudes listened with one accord to the things that were spoken by Philip, when they heard and saw the signs which he did.
AÈmboè buu ca wááwá aè geèe máè neè ma mmbo a?’	Didn't my hand make all these things?'
See ke byè kwâa nè mbèŋ.	We plant corn in the rainy season.
Rmòoshì ca rli bòni sê.	This test is very easy.
Weèe lá rkoèñnïì kuèntombïì neè buu wááwá, lá ntee foñ a bfee ce Nyúè aè fa neè beèe, lañlañ bfee ce e fa neè beèe aè rcep yi ntuu.	Follow after love, and earnestly desire spiritual gifts, but especially that you may prophesy.
M ce laèa wa'a, a ke' ce lapni weèe lapni ka'. Weèr túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ aèmboè weèr aè m suñ weèe naè. Káè yu rkwe áè, káè yu rluèñ á, seèe ku ba aèbee.	I say this not to condemn you, for I have said before, that you are in our hearts to die together and live together.
Wimbùm a ke zhe btǎafʉʼ.	Mbum people eat grassmaggots.
Pitaè aè ye leè', a laa enáê, “Ndoèo co' máè ce ka' tá ba ená m ce laèa ba yuu mini ka'. M rïìñ ñwáè anaè ka'.” Nduñgúp aè ku toñ aè nfeè' anaè.	"Then he began to curse and to swear, ""I don't know the man!"" Immediately the rooster crowed."
Rbyemïì li m geèe Musïìs aè ka' kuè' gháá ñwáè, a kani ená a fa keèr too ye ená muu embe nto' ñkúú aè to' Ijïìp ka'.	By faith, Moses, when he had grown up, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
Máè kuushi ená máè m baèptir beèe embe ndaèp Stáfánaès foñ. Máè kwaè'shi máná máè m ker baptir ñwáè moè' caa efa beèe ca ka'.	(I also baptized the household of Stephanas; besides them, I don't know whether I baptized any other.)
Wɛ̀ màʼ zhi ŋgar njep mbè njokɛ?	Why have you thrown his gun outside?
Nfòshi à fashi yɛɛ, yɛɛnì sê.	When Nfoshi sang the song very well.
Nyúè be geèe tá Jisos Kraâis vú aè nfeè' ce e m láè. Nyúè ca yu Nyúè ce beèe a ba ce náèsi, yu ye ce e ce sa' caè'caè'. E yu ñkúú neè bkúú wááwá, a ba Taèr neè btaèr wááwá.	which in its own times he will show, who is the blessed and only Ruler, the King of kings, and Lord of lords;
Seèe aè rïìñ buu ce vi yu mini war. Seèe aè ka' ker kani buu anaè gee ba buu bbebep baná tañshi mo' yi ker ba ce aède' yi siñsïì buu bbebep ce seèe aè geèe naè ka'.	For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
Nyúè aè geêe, woweèe a ke' riñ ye ka'.	But their eyes were kept from recognizing him.
Máèári aè laa enáê, “A máè ñwáè rfaè' Tataê. Tá yuu ce wáè laèa anaè yi ku ba aèmboè wáè laèa.” E ka' laèa wa'a, ncïìndap Nyúè aè ma'shïì ye a duê.	"Mary said, ""Behold, the handmaid of the Lord; be it to me according to your word."" The angel departed from her."
Cumúnyañ ba neè wáè. Bkar a ce caè'ni wáè. Caè'ni bkar aè mlii.	nan
Woweèe a ka' fúú enjep roè, Yú' Tata yi lor Felep a du aègho, ñwáâ nsoèñ ca aè ker yá ye ka', a nati a ce duè, a ce lu'shi.	When they came up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord caught Philip away, and the eunuch didn't see him any more, for he went on his way rejoicing.
E m ce fúú efa múè beèe, ce duè aè ntee rïìñ, ce geèe rloo.	But he withdrew himself into the desert, and prayed.
a ka' ce byeè, ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr aèwaâa nduunjïì, bsiñ vi vúê, a ye.	As he sowed, some seeds fell by the roadside, and the birds came and devoured them.
Bèe mòʼ bàa msur sê.	Some people hate pepper too much.
E m ce baèpñger aèmboè sa'mbeèñ wa'a, vi bcáè' vi ce fúp aèmboè mmbaè' wa'a.	His appearance was like lightning, and his clothing white as snow.
Pol aè laa neè ye enáê, “Nyúè be lïìp wáè, wáè ce aè yu aèmboè ñgúè' ndap mbúú. Wáè loèr mncir a ce sa' máè aègho, a ker ce bú' mncir anaè njobeè' wáè laèa ená a lip máè.”	"Then Paul said to him, ""God will strike you, you whitewashed wall! Do you sit to judge me according to the law, and command me to be struck contrary to the law?"""
Yi ka' ba ená m ce geèe ba mfaè' yaè Ta ka', weèe fa byemi neè máè ka'.	If I don't do the works of my Father, don't believe me.
Jǒn à mʉ vʉ nèŋkùr.	John came yesterday.
Rraa Nyúè li m ce sañ aè rla' anaè, rla' anaè li ce laè'ñger aèmboè luèr ce a too ená jaspaè, a ce raañger aèmboè kwakwa' wa'a.	having the glory of God. Her light was like a most precious stone, as if it was a jasper stone, clear as crystal;
E m siñsi mncir Musïìs ce vi m ce suñ beèe buu ce beèe a ba ce geèe. E m geèe wa'a tá e bo loèr beèe embe mnjáâá bbaa ca, ba a woweèe aèbee, tá a ba njáèá moè'sir, cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè.	having abolished in the flesh the hostility, the law of commandments contained in ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man of the two, making peace;
Woweèe a ka' fúúse ce duèse, Jus magoèr se ker ba beèe mo' enje jáá ce a m byemi neè Nyúè Juês, a du aèmbuèu Pol ba Baènabaès. Pol ba Baènabaès a de' a woweèe, a fa woweèe ñger ená woweèe a ku ce yu' ba ese Nyúè tá e be túr ntee boèñboñ neè woweèe.	Now when the synagogue broke up, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas; who, speaking to them, urged them to continue in the grace of God.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Pailáèt aè laêa, bsoogáè a lip Jisoès.	So Pilate then took Jesus, and flogged him.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' efa múè bcïìndap saèamba ce a m túr bghee saèamba naè. E m vúè a laa neè máè enáê, “Vúè tá m duñshi wáè ñgá' ce kwaèraè ce e caèa ñger na be yá. Kwaèraè ca táá aètu rla' ce a baè'ri mbetar mdip.	"One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, ""Come here. I will show you the judgment of the great prostitute who sits on many waters,"
Ntaaŋguu anà à tooŋger gòr, gwàr zhì njɛɛ.	That stick has twisted too much, cut another one.
Yi yu ená aè rlaèa li moè' ce ñwáè aè m be yá'ni ka', yu ba ncoèo neè beèe ce a byemi neè ye ka', ke' ba ba ená yu ncoèo ba neè beèe ce a byemi wáá ka'. AÈ rcep ntuu Nyúè yu ncoèo ba neè beèe ce a byemi neè ye, ke' ba ená yu ncoèo ba neè beèe ce a byemi neè ye ka' ka'.	Therefore other languages are for a sign, not to those who believe, but to the unbelieving; but prophesying is for a sign, not to the unbelieving, but to those who believe.
M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè Taitoès ce e yu muu waè ce mini njobeè' e byemi neè Jisos Kraâis aèmboè seèe aè byemi naè. M ce loo máná Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta ker ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè', túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	to Titus, my true child according to a common faith: Grace, mercy, and peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
Jus a m yá máè ce sár mnsár weèr ñwáè moè' embe Ndaèp Nyúè ka', a ker yá ená máè ce káè' ñgá' aè mndaèp mloo káè aè dïì' mo' aè rla' na ka'.	In the temple they didn't find me disputing with anyone or stirring up a crowd, either in the synagogues, or in the city.
Weèr aè ka' ba bgoè'sïì, weèe ba btatap, nyor boñ weèr seê. Weèr ku ce loo neè Nyúè ba ená weèe kupse, ba yáánïì.	For we rejoice when we are weak and you are strong. And this we also pray for, even your perfecting.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca mïìsi, a loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du aè mbeèp ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ce e yu neèñguu rdip Jodaèn.	It happened when Jesus had finished these words, he departed from Galilee, and came into the borders of Judea beyond the Jordan.
Weèe ce weèe ce koèñ ená weèe ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' weèe ce láè mncir, weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè gaèpni. Weèe aè bá yuu boèñboñ ce Nyúè aè ba geèe neè weèe.	You are alienated from Christ, you who desire to be justified by the law. You have fallen away from grace.
Mɛ̀ ba gee mamnjiʼ.	I did it by myself.
Weèr ce suñ weèe ba yuu ce Tata aè laèa. Yi yu ená be ba aè nfeè' ce Tata aè vúè, seèe ce seèe bii bteèe seèe ke' du yá ye entombïì neè beèe ce a kweñger ka'.	For this we tell you by the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who are left to the coming of the Lord, will in no way precede those who have fallen asleep.
a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Loè efa wáâ ñgoèñ, fúú efa múè yoè beèe, du aè ñgoèñ ce m be duèñshi wáè.’	and said to him, 'Get out of your land, and from your relatives, and come into a land which I will show you.'
Beâe aè rla' anaè a m lu'shi seê.	There was great joy in that city.
A mbuèu ce m ce sañ na, máè rïìñ máná aè be geèe yuu ce máè laèa na, keèr geèe caa embo naè.	Having confidence in your obedience, I write to you, knowing that you will do even beyond what I say.
Buu wááwá aè m geèe yi aè ñger Nyúè. Yuu mo' yi yu ce yi m buu efa rgeèe ka'.	All things were made through him. Without him was not anything made that has been made.
Wɛ̀ ke zhʉʼnyor à buu cicì sê.	You always procrastinate over very little things.
Ñwáè anaè e ke yu' rboèñ aè yuu bbebep ka', e ke yu' rboèñ ba aè yuu ce yi yu mini.	doesn't rejoice in unrighteousness, but rejoices with the truth;
Ncïìndap Nyúè yïì elúèsimbuèu aè ñwañ ñgá' enjep ghee yi mbekïì. E ka' ñwañ, njeèndoñ aè laa embe kaèbaèraè' ce yi m ba mbe Ndaèp Nyúè naè enáê, “Yi mïì.”	"The seventh poured out his bowl into the air. A loud voice came forth out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, ""It is done!"""
Beèe mo' efa weâe mú a ce kwaè'shi ená m be kúti vúè yá weèe ka', a ce naèa tu.	Now some are puffed up, as though I were not coming to you.
AÈ ka' ba neètú', ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè vúê, a mú' bkeèñ shañ, a fúr woweèe embo, a laa enáê,	But an angel of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and brought them out, and said,
Bfúr waê, m ce kwaè' máná máè be koni yuu anaè ka', yuu mo'sir yi yu ená máè maè'shi buu ce vi m caèa, a ce duè ba aèmbuèu yuu ce yi bii kuèntombïì.	Brothers, I don't regard myself as yet having taken hold, but one thing I do. Forgetting the things which are behind, and stretching forward to the things which are before,
Rbyemïì li m geèe e loâ aè to' Ijïìp a du yi yu a ke' wáp njobeè' ntee yi m bep ñkúú ka'. E m kur ntee a du aèmboè ñwáè ce e m ce yá lá Nyúè ce aède' ñwáè yá neè mmir ka' naè wa'a.	By faith, he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he endured, as seeing him who is invisible.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe buu bbebep baná ñgaèñ yu ñkwaèa neè buu bbebep.	"Jesus answered them, ""Most certainly I tell you, everyone who commits sin is the bondservant of sin."
ÁÈno, Taèr, ca yu ba yuu ce wáè m ce yu' rboèñ aè rgeèe.	Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight.
Baná máè yá máná yi yu seè'ni aèmboè ncir wa'a ená m ka' ce koèñ aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ, ku vú ba yïû bebep njep máâ ntee.	I find then the law, that, to me, while I desire to do good, evil is present.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a gwar bbaèp mtáá a du a koni ye aègho aè nduunjïì, a ce yoèp enáê, “Hoèsanaè! Bghoènïì vi yu neè ñwáè ce e ce vúè aè rlii Tataê, a ba ñkúú aè to' Isráèl.”	"they took the branches of the palm trees, and went out to meet him, and cried out, ""Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!"""
Jisoès aè m naètïû aè aèfo, a du aè dïì' ce rla' Tayaè li m ba. E m duè a ba' aèfo, a niñ mbe ndaèp, a koñ ená ñwáè moè' riñ ená e yu mbo ka'. Geewa'a beèe a ku rïîñ.	From there he arose, and went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. He entered into a house, and didn't want anyone to know it, but he couldn't escape notice.
Zhii kɛ̀ŋ zhi ku cu bìi.	His door is still closed.
Nyúè aè m kani efa rfa muu yïì ka'. E m fa muu yïì a seâe btuè. E ka' fa muu yïì, baná e be fa seèe buu wááwá foñ aè cicïì.	He who didn't spare his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how would he not also with him freely give us all things?
Weèr aè rïìñ yer yu aèmboè e geèe a ka' ce yá buu ka', a riñ ñwáè ce e geèe e ka' ce yá buu ka'. Bipshi neè neè ye. E yu nleeñwáè. E be suñ weèe neè yi cuèu.”	"but how he now sees, we don't know; or who opened his eyes, we don't know. He is of age. Ask him. He will speak for himself."""
Nráèá ce Jisoès ce toèo neè Nyúè anaè yuu seèe. Nráèá anaè yi ce rúèú aè múè beèe wááwá, káè yu beèe ce a be luèñ áè, káè yu beèe ce a be bú áè.	For we are a sweet aroma of Christ to God, in those who are saved, and in those who perish;
Ñwáè moè' ku ba ce e ce suñ aèmboè máè. M rïìñ máná yuu ce e ce suñ aèmboè máè yi yu mini.	It is another who testifies about me. I know that the testimony which he testifies about me is true.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m bipshi neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, a m bi ñwáè ca e ku ba nfeèp njo' yïì buu bbebep káè njo' buu bbebep yïì ma ba yïì taê?”	"His disciples asked him, ""Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he was born blind?"""
Yuu ce aède' ñwáè fa aètu li ryoèñ yu ká?	For what will a man give in exchange for his life?
E ka' baè' yu' ená AÈkáloè aè ye kúú yïì ta Hároèd a ce sa' aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, e wáp aè rduè cu aèfo. Nyúè aè ka' báá ye aè rlo, e natïì a du aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in the place of his father, Herod, he was afraid to go there. Being warned in a dream, he withdrew into the region of Galilee,
Máè m ba weèr woweèe, a ke'ni woweèe, woweèe a cu njep lo rlii ce wáè m fa neè máè. Máè cïìñ woweèe, yuu mo' yi ke' joo woweèe ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, moè' efa woweèe aè m bú caa efa ñwáè ce yi yu ená e be bú naè ka'. E m bú tá yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi bo ghááte njo.	While I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name. Those whom you have given me I have kept. None of them is lost, except the son of destruction, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
Mɛ̀ sʉ̀ti berɛ̀ŋ kù ŋgàa.	I hid the groundnuts on the shelf.
Nyúè aè m duèñshi li rkoèñnïì neè seèe aè njáèá ená e m tuu muu yïì ce e m ku ba moè'sir njep ñgoèñ ená seèe bo cu njo' ye.	By this God's love was revealed in us, that God has sent his one and only Son into the world that we might live through him.
Ka' ba ená yuu bebep ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe, yi m geèe rkwe li túr ñger mbenduè ñgoèñ wááwá, beèe wááwá a ce kweñger njobeè' ñwáè moè'sir anaè, baná yi yu foñ ená rboâñntee ñwáè moè'sir, ce yu Jisos Kraêis, li be geèe beèe magoèr a koni rfa ce aè cicïì, ba beâe byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, koni ryoèñ, so buu bbebep.	For if by the trespass of the one, death reigned through the one; so much more will those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness reign in life through the one, Jesus Christ.
Máè m ka' tá baè geèe mfaè' ce ñwáè aè m be gee ka' fa waâp mú na ka', a m ba taèa woweèe aè yuu bebep ka'. Woweèe a yá mfaè' ca seè'ni, a ku bii ce baèa máè, ba yaè Ta foñ.	If I hadn't done among them the works which no one else did, they wouldn't have had sin. But now have they seen and also hated both me and my Father.
Bfúr waê, weèr ce koèñ ená weèe riñ njáèá ñgá' ce weèr aè m yá aè ñgoâñ Áshaè. Ñgá' anaè aè m tap seê, a ba aèmboè ntáèr ce yi m rïìr a caa yer ñger wa'a, wer aè lo a ce kwaè'shi ená ñwáè be cu nteèe ka'.	For we don't desire to have you uninformed, brothers, concerning our affliction which happened to us in Asia, that we were weighed down exceedingly, beyond our power, so much that we despaired even of life.
Bkar waê, máè m ce koèñ magoèr se aè rsañ neè weèe kuu liseèe rluèñ. Geewa'a, máè yá máná yi boèñ ená m sañ ñwaè' neè weèe seè'ni tá m bo fa weèe ñger tá weèe táá tatap njep rbyemïì ce Nyúè aè m fa neè yïì beèe. AÈde' nsuñ du kuu rbyemïì ca kee kupse ka'.	Beloved, while I was very eager to write to you about our common salvation, I was constrained to write to you exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints.
Zhì mâ à ba deʼ ye e koʼni.	Her mother shouted at her and she became sad.
Máè rïìñ máná wáâ ke yu' la rloo aè nfeè' wááwá. Geewa'a, m ce laèa cena njo' beèe ce a táá na, tá woweèe a bo byemi ená a wáè ce wáè m tuu máè.”	"I know that you always listen to me, but because of the multitude that stands around I said this, that they may believe that you sent me."""
Jisoès aè m fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ka' ce duè, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yá ye, a duñshi ye Ndap Nyúè.	Jesus went out from the temple, and was going on his way. His disciples came to him to show him the buildings of the temple.
E ká' beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a bipshi neè woweèe ená yi m ba ená a be bi Kraâis anaè ba fá lá?	Gathering together all the chief priests and scribes of the people, he asked them where the Christ would be born.
Mɛ̀ làa enɛ à fa ne mɛ̀ àtu yaa mbàa.	I am saying that you should give me because my money.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Haba! Beèe eluèuni ce weèe buu rbyemïì, a beesi mini tútúèñ na. M be cu weèe seèe, kur ntee neè weèe duè baè' fá? Vúè neè muu woè mbena.”	"Jesus answered, ""Faithless and perverse generation, how long shall I be with you and bear with you? Bring your son here."""
Awá e laa beèe anaè a cuteè aè nsheè. E lor bráâd saèamba caè, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a gapshïì neè beèe anaè.	He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground, and he took the seven loaves. Having given thanks, he broke them, and gave them to his disciples to serve, and they served the multitude.
Baa zhi yu fɛ̀ɛ njobèʼ mor zhi kɛti kaʼ.	The fufu is soft because the fire is not burning.
Mboè weèe bii kuushi ená aè m ba mbe nfeè' ce seèe aè m ba naè, máè suñ weèe buu ca a?	Don't you remember that, when I was still with you, I told you these things?
AÈmboè m yu ñwáè ntuu Jisos Kraêis, aède' m laa neè wáè a máâ ñger máná aè gee yuu ce aè túr aè rgeèe.	Therefore, though I have all boldness in Christ to command you that which is appropriate,
Máè m ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè weèe wa'a, a ke' ce sañ ba ená m ce sa' ñwáè ce e geèe yuu bebep, káè beèenjïì ñwáè ce a m geèe yuu bebep neè ye ka'. Máè m sañ tá weèe bo yá rara aè bsii Nyúè ená weèe aè fa weêe mnyor neè weèr neè mini- ñwáè.	So although I wrote to you, I wrote not for his cause that did the wrong, nor for his cause that suffered the wrong, but that your earnest care for us might be revealed in you in the sight of God.
Loo neè ená Nyúè ja' máè tá m gee tá beèe a riñ nsuñ anaè boèñboñ aèmboè máè ba geèe.	that I may reveal it as I ought to speak.
Yu yuu bwáp seê, ce ñwáè aè ka' táá ená Nyúè ce e yu nteèe teni mi mnsa'.	It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
Mɛ̀ yuu cɛ̀ʼ anà à ntaa jòr sê.	I bought this cloth at a very cheap price.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Njeñwáè, aè ce war ba ká?” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce war njobeè' a loèr yaè Tata a du aègho, máè ke' riñ faèdïì' ce a láè ye ka'.”	"They told her, ""Woman, why are you weeping?"" She said to them, ""Because they have taken away my Lord, and I don't know where they have laid him."""
Mboè weèe rïìñ weená weèe yu Ndap Nyúè, Yú' Nyúè yi ce cu njep weèe a?	Don't you know that you are a temple of God, and that God's Spirit lives in you?
M ce suñ weèe ba buu ce máè yá ese yaè Taê, weèe aè ce geèe ye ba buu ce weèe aè yá'ni ese yeè taê.”	"I say the things which I have seen with my Father; and you also do the things which you have seen with your father."""
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Habai! A m baè'ri Ndap Nyúè ca aè bfeè' ncoèp-ntuunfu- aè-mñkyeèe. AÈde' aè gee wá ká ka' ba'ri aè mnoâñ btaar?”	"The Jews therefore said, ""It took forty-six years to build this temple! Will you raise it up in three days?"""
Tata Jisoès aè ka' rïìñ ená beèe Farïìsi a yu' buu ca, e natïû aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a ce kúti aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	he left Judea, and departed into Galilee.
Yàp ndèe bòŋ kaʼ njobèʼ woowèe a ke tarshi gùu a bjàr wèe.	Their custom is not good because they usually marry their sisters.
Woowèe a mʉ laa enɛ woowèe a yuʼ nè wap btùʼ waʼa a ka byemi.	They said that they heard it themselves before they could believe.
Mɛ̀ m dʉʼ a caa ye.	I ran fast and passed him.
Woweèe a m duè njïìsaèp ka', ma nteèendúñ moè' aè suâu aè to' Kreêt, aè ba yïì ce a too enáê, Yïû aè bke'.	But before long, a stormy wind beat down from shore, which is called Euroclydon.
Bkar waê, baná yi boèñ ená weèe yu'ni neè máè seè'ni ce m yu njïìsaèp na, yu'ni neè caa aèmboè weèe aè m ce yu'ni neè máè aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ba naè. Weèe ku ce fa', ce kañ neè rwáp-ñwáè tá weèe bo mïìsi koni rluèñ.	So then, my beloved, even as you have always obeyed, not only in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
Ñwáè wááwá e ke geèe buu bbebep magoèr. Ñwáè aè ka' ba ce e ke laèa yuu bebep ka', baná ñgaèñ yu yáánïì aè buu wááwá, a ce loèr nfeè' aè buu wááwá ce e ce geèe.	For in many things we all stumble. If anyone doesn't stumble in word, the same is a perfect man, able to bridle the whole body also.
Njáèá sá' ce aède' m konïì efa rfaè' ca yu ba ká? Yaè sá' ku ba ba ená m fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe aè cicïì. A mbuèu ce m ce laèa máná beèe a fa laè' máè aèmboè ñwáè rfeè'shïì ka'.	What then is my reward? That, when I preach the Good News, I may present the Good News of Christ without charge, so as not to abuse my authority in the Good News.
Vi m túr ñger aè rgeèe ñwáè tá e ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka'. Yuu ce seèe ce laèa aègho seè'ni yi yu aèndeèe njobeè' a yuu ce aède' yi vú neè seèe aègee Nyúè.	(for the law made nothing perfect), and a bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw near to God.
Waè' cena yi yu ená woweèe a m kote tá woweèe a bo gweè keèr naèti ka' a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' woweèe a m geèe yuu bebep, Nyúè aè fa fáñ neè beèe enje jáá tá woweèe a bo luèñ, tá beèe Isráèl a ko'ndoñ neè woweèe.	I ask then, did they stumble that they might fall? May it never be! But by their fall salvation has come to the Gentiles, to provoke them to jealousy.
Weèe aè ba ce lu'shi lu'shi ená weèe ce yá ñgá' ce Kraâis aè m yá, tá weèe bo keè lu'shi ce yu' rboèñ aè nfeè' ce e be vúè duèñshi yi foèo.	But because you are partakers of Christ's sufferings, rejoice; that at the revelation of his glory you also may rejoice with exceeding joy.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Tu ñwáè embo a yïû nda, rlii ce a sañ mbo aè ba li nda?”	"He asked them, ""Whose is this image and inscription?"""
Yer nsuu zhi ki sê.	Our farm has overgrown.
Ŋwɛ̀ ca tʉr rba à nyòr.	This person has a deformity in the body.
Ñwáè aè ka' bipshi ená weèe ce fyáèá njoká lá, weèe suñ ye ená, Tata ce taè' geèe yuu aègho, ka' kúsi.”	"If anyone asks you, 'Why are you doing this?' say, 'The Lord needs him;' and immediately he will send him back here."""
Yáê, m be suñ weèe yuu ce weèe aè m be riñ ka'. Seèe wááwá be keè kweñger ka'. Seèe wááwá be keè kupse kupse.	Behold, I tell you a mystery. We will not all sleep, but we will all be changed,
Woweèe a m káè' a ce toshi ye enáê, “Weèr aè yá ñwáè ca aè ce karsi btu ese yeèr beèe. E ce laèa neè beèe ená woweèe a fa maè' mbaâa baèraè' neè ñkwe Rum ka', a ce laèa foñ ená a lá ye Kraâis ce e yu ñkúú.”	"They began to accuse him, saying, ""We found this man perverting the nation, forbidding paying taxes to Caesar, and saying that he himself is Christ, a king."""
a laa enáê, “Máè geèe yuu bebep, a fyeni ñwáè ce e geèe yuu mo' bebep ka'.” Woweèe a laa enáê, “Yïì anaè yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè weèr ka'. A yoè nsa'.”	"saying, ""I have sinned in that I betrayed innocent blood."" But they said, ""What is that to us? You see to it."""
Weèr aè naèa tu a caa embe dïì' weèr aè ba naèa ka' njobeè' weèr aè naèa tu neè rfaè' ce beèe mo' a geèe ka'. Weèr ce kwaè'shi ba ená le rbyemïì li be kuè ce kuè' tá ler rfaè' ce weèr ce geèe fa weâe mú li ku' foñ seê.	not boasting beyond proper limits in other men's labors, but having hope that as your faith grows, we will be abundantly enlarged by you in our sphere of influence,
Nyúè aè maè' yïì beèe ce e m ce efa rkáè' ka'. Mboè weèe rïìñ yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè aèmboè AÈlajaè naè a? AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' moè', e laa bebep aèmboè beèe Isráèl neè Nyúè.	God didn't reject his people, which he foreknew. Or don't you know what the Scripture says about Elijah? How he pleads with God against Israel:
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè gee beèe a ke'seè efa byañ njáèá jáá jáèá jáá, a gee beèe ce a m túr byú' bbebep a ke'seè, a gee beèe ce a m feèp, a ker ce yá buu.	In that hour he cured many of diseases and plagues and evil spirits; and to many who were blind he gave sight.
Woweèe a ka' ce koèñ aè rrïìñ yuu mo', woweèe a bipshïì neè bduu wap aè mlaè'. Yu yuu ncoosi tu neè bbyeèñge aè rlaèa yuu mbe múè coêr.	If they desire to learn anything, let them ask their own husbands at home, for it is shameful for a woman to chatter in the assembly.
Jisoès aè fyá' woweèe, a laa enáê, “Ca yi yu tatap se neè beèe, aè ka' ba yi neè Nyúè, buu wááwá yu aètáèr.”	"Looking at them, Jesus said, ""With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible."""
Mfaè' mi yu jáá jáèá jáá ce beèe a ke geèe, aè ku ba Nyúè moè'sir ce e fa beèe wááwá bfee aè rgeèe mfaè' anaè.	There are various kinds of workings, but the same God, who works all things in all.
AÈde' ñwáè lor mruâ' mfi foñ lá njep mñguèp mruè' vïû brúèú ka'. E ka' gee wa'a baná mruâ' mfi anaè mi be loè koo, to'shi mñguèp mruè' anaè, tá mruè' mi kúte aè nsheè, tá mñguèp mruè' anaè vi bú aè cicïì. Yi ke ba ená a lá mruâ' mfi ba njep mñguèp mruè' vïû bfi tá mi bo kúète ka', tá mñguèp mruè' vi to'ñger ka'.”	"Neither do people put new wine into old wineskins, or else the skins would burst, and the wine be spilled, and the skins ruined. No, they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved."""
Má máè yu ñwáè ce m ce faè' njeptii beèe ce yap nta' yi caèa ya. M túr bsoogáè ce a yu njep máâ tïìi foñ. M ka' laa neè moè' enáê, ‘Duè’, baná e be duè. M ka' laa neè moè' enáê, ‘Vúè’, baná e be vúè. M ka' laa neè yaè ñwáè rfaè' enáê, ‘Geèe ca’, baná e be geèe yi.”	"For I am also a man under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go,' and he goes; and tell another, 'Come,' and he comes; and tell my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it."""
M ce loo máná aè koo muu waè OÈnásimoès ce máè beèeti yi ta seè'ni ce m yu mbe shañ na.	I beg you for my child, whom I have become the father of in my chains, Onesimus,
M ce laèa ba yuu mini aè rlii Kraêis. M ce nya' mnde' ka'. Ya ntee ce Yú' Rara yi yu njo yi táá yaè njïìnsa' ená,	I tell the truth in Christ. I am not lying, my conscience testifying with me in the Holy Spirit,
Ka' cu, ñwáè msaèasïì aè vú a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a laa enáê, “Tataê, wáè ka' ce koèñ, aè gee m ke'seè, ba nrara.”	"Behold, a leper came to him and worshiped him, saying, ""Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean."""
Nyàa zhìsèe yû?	Where is our meat.
Woweèe a niñ aè mndap mloo, koñ aè rcu aè mnta' beâe bgoèrgoèr, a baè' aè mñkaè', ce ba mnta' bboèñboñ.	and the best seats in the synagogues, and the best places at feasts:
Yi yu neè mini-ñwáè ená Hároèd ba Pontiyos Pailáèt a m vúèse aèbee aè rla' ca a beèe enje jáá weèe, ker ba beèe Isráèl, a ce roèo mkuèu Jisoès, ce e yu yoè ñwáè rfaâ' nrara ce wáè m yo'.	"For truly, in this city against your holy servant, Jesus, whom you anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel, were gathered together
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	4	28	Woweèe a m ku gee ba yuu ce wáè m kwaè'shi a lá aè yo ñger ená yi be keè koni.	to do whatever your hand and your council foreordained to happen.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	4	29	Tataê, yá laè seè'ni aèmboè a ce wápsi weèr naè, geèe tá yoè boo mfaè' a fe'shi wo blaèa neè ntee-ñwáè,	Now, Lord, look at their threats, and grant to your servants to speak your word with all boldness,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	4	30	naèa yo bo mbekïì, gee tá beèe a luñ efa byañ, fa weèr ñger tá weèr bo duèñshi mncoèo, geèe buu bghagha' aè rlii Jisoès ce e yu yoè ñwáè rfaâ' nrara.”	while you stretch out your hand to heal; and that signs and wonders may be done through the name of your holy Servant Jesus."
a ce laèa enáê, “Tata aè fúú efa rkwe neè mini-ñwáè, a duñshi yïì nyor neè Saimúèn.”	"saying, ""The Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared to Simon!"""
Máè yá máná yi boèñ wa'a. Máè rïìñ máná m be cu weèe seèe, tá m bo jaè' weèe tá weèe du kuèntombïì neè le rbyemïì, keèr ce lu'shi,	Having this confidence, I know that I will remain, yes, and remain with you all, for your progress and joy in the faith,
Awá Jisoès aè ka' ce yá'ni mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a laa neè ñger-ñwáè enáê, “Weèe rïìñ máè, a riñ faèdïì' ce m ce vúè. Ka' yi yu wa' máè vúè aèfa ba aè ya ñger ka'. Ñwáè ce e tuu máè yu ñwáè mini. Weèe rïìñ ye ka'.	"Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, ""You both know me, and know where I am from. I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom you don't know."
Yu yuu boèñboñ seê, ce aè ka' ce yá ñgá' aètu yuu ce wáè geèe ka', a kur ntee, a ce yá ñgá' anaè wa'a, njobeè' aè ce koèñ aè rgeèe yuu ce yi boèñ Nyúè.	For it is commendable if someone endures pain, suffering unjustly, because of conscience toward God.
Káâ' seè'ni na, ñwáè fa keèr fa máè ñgá' ka', njobeè' ncoèo ce e yu a máâ nyoèr ce duèñshi ená m yu ñwáè Jisos Kraêis.	From now on, let no one cause me any trouble, for I bear the marks of the Lord Jesus branded on my body.
“Cúú neè mñkaènda mbenduè bcáè', cú' wee blaêm, tá vi ce raa.	"Let your waist be dressed and your lamps burning.
Luke	Luêk	12	36	Ba neè aèmboè beèe ce a cu a ce keè' ená yaèp masaè kúti efa Ñkaâ' bguèu, e ce kúti, kuèushi keèñ, tá woweèe a bo kuè múè' neè ye aè nfeè' ce e kuèushi anaè.	Be like men watching for their lord, when he returns from the marriage feast; that, when he comes and knocks, they may immediately open to him.
Luke	Luêk	12	37	Rboâñtu li be ba neè ñgaâa mfaè' ce yaèp masaè aè ka' vú yá aèmboè woweèe a tami nyor. M ce laèa neè weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená e be cúú cáè' rfaè', laèa tá woweèe a cute aè nsheè tá e caasi byee neè woweèe.	Blessed are those servants, whom the lord will find watching when he comes. Most certainly I tell you, that he will dress himself, and make them recline, and will come and serve them.
Luke	Luêk	12	38	Rboâñtu li be ba neè woweèe ce yaèp masaè aè ka' vú neè ntee-tú', káè tá túè' ka' raa áè, ku yá aèmboè woweèe a tami nyor.	They will be blessed if he comes in the second or third watch, and finds them so.
Luke	Luêk	12	39	Rïìñ neè ca ená ñwáè ndap aè ka' ba riñ nfeè' ce nyáèá ce vúè, e ba maè'shi tá nyáèá kep yïì ndap ka'.	But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched, and not allowed his house to be broken into.
Luke	Luêk	12	40	Baná wee weèe foñ tami nyor njobeè' Muu Ñwáè be vúè aè nfeè' ce weèe ce keè' ye ka'.”	Therefore be ready also, for the Son of Man is coming in an hour that you don't expect him."
Mnoèñ vi ka' caâa btaar, ká' embe nfeè' ce Fástoès aè m koo nta', Fástoès aè natïû aè rla' Sisaèriyaè a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	Festus therefore, having come into the province, after three days went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
a vú a táá mbe yeâ njïì aègee mi mkuèu a ce war, mñgoommir mi ce cáácá mbe mkuèu Jisoès, e ce siñsi neè yi nyúè'tu. E m nyoè'shi mkuèu Jisoès, a cu'ni mgúr ce e m túr naè aègho.	Standing behind at his feet weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears, and she wiped them with the hair of her head, kissed his feet, and anointed them with the ointment.
Beèe a ka' niñ coêr, ñwáè wááwá ce cep ntuu Nyúè, njáèá beèe ca a ka' niñ, yuu ce woweèe a yu' yi be geèe tá woweèe a yá yaèp buu bbebep, keèr geèe tá yap ntee ye sa' woweèe,	But if all prophesy, and someone unbelieving or unlearned comes in, he is reproved by all, and he is judged by all.
Jisoès aè m ce kuè' aè nyoèr ba aè bfee, a túr bsii wañ a Nyúè ker ba beèe.	And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and men.
Yu ye ce e geèe seèe aè konïì fáñ, a riñ rboâñntee Nyúè ce seèe ce yá seè'ni na, a ce lu'shi njobeè' seèe rïìñ seená seèe be koni foèo ce yi loè ese Nyúè.	through whom we also have our access by faith into this grace in which we stand. We rejoice in hope of the glory of God.
Nfeè' aè m tuuse ka', ghaa yi ko' aè rla' Áfásoès wááwá. Beèe ca a m koo Gayoès ba AÈristakoès a du aègho mbe mambe ñgoèr. Beèe a mmbaa ca a m ba beâe aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ce a m ce kar a Pol weèe.	The whole city was filled with confusion, and they rushed with one accord into the theater, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, men of Macedonia, Paul's companions in travel.
Nyúè ce m ce faè' neè ye neè ya ntee wááwá aèmboè m ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè muu yïì na, rïìñ ená m ce loo neè weèe aè nfeè' wááwá.	For God is my witness, whom I serve in my spirit in the Good News of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers,
Be ba aè nfeè' ce woweèe a ce cep ntuu Nyúè anaè tá woweèe a túr ñger aè rgeèe tá mbeèñ ker gweè aè nfeè' anaè ka'. Woweèe a be túr ñger aè rgeèe tá mdip enjep ñgoèñ wááwá mi beeñger aè bláá. Woweèe a be túr ñger aè rgeèe tá mñgá' njáèá jáá jáèá jáá vi koni beèe enjep ñgoèñ aè nfeè' wááwá ce woweèe a ka' koêñ.	These have the power to shut up the sky, that it may not rain during the days of their prophecy. They have power over the waters, to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they desire.
Blaŋ nfuʼ ba blaŋ Sàamba bvi ku ba yɛɛnì.	Carved statues of the doorframes of the ʼnfuʼ and ʼsaambaʼ secret societies are same.
Zhi yu beer.	It is difficult.
Weèr yu yer beèe Nyúè. Ñwáè ce e rïìñ Nyúè ce yu' yuu ce weèr ce laèa. Ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè Nyúè ka', ce yu' yuu ce weèr ce laèa ka'. Cena a yuu ce yi ce geèe seèe ka' ce rïìñ yú' ce mini, ba yú' mnde'.	We are of God. He who knows God listens to us. He who is not of God doesn't listen to us. By this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
Máè war seê, njobeè' ñwáè moè' aè m ghááte aè rbúèr ñwaè' ca fyá' mbo ka'.	And I wept much, because no one was found worthy to open the book, or to look in it.
Ndì a zhìi mâ a dù ntaa, a yuu cɛ̀ʼ.	Ndi and his mother have gone to market and bought a cloth.
Woweèe wááwá a yu' rboèñ neè ye, a bááñger se aè nlaâa boèñboñ ce e m laèa anaè. Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “AÈmboè a ye muu Josáèf a?”	"All testified about him, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth, and they said, ""Isn't this Joseph's son?"""
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca wáá, a lor ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a woweèe a du a tuu ntoèñ Kádroèn faèdïì' ce ñka' bce yi m ba. E m niñ mbo a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu anaè.	When Jesus had spoken these words, he went out with his disciples over the brook Kidron, where there was a garden, into which he and his disciples entered.
Bfee ce Nyúè aè fa neè beèe mo' aè rcep yi ntuu vi be keè caèa, tá bfee ce e fa neè beèe mo' aè rlaèa bli ce a m be yá'ni ka', vi mïî, tá bfee ce e fa neè beèe mo' aè rrïìñ buu, vi ker ba ka'. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè rkoèñnïì, aède' li ke mi ka'.	Love never fails. But where there are prophecies, they will be done away with. Where there are various languages, they will cease. Where there is knowledge, it will be done away with.
Wèr à kwàʼshi nè yer tu enɛ zhi bòŋ à rvʉ̀shi ye kaʼ.	We thought that it will not be good to laugh at him.
Beèe anaè a m táá kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè' ba buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe naè, ker ba beâe bgoèrgoèr ce a m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa naè a ce yoèp yáá fi. AÈde' ñwáè moè' aè m ba yá'ni yáá anaè caa efa beèe ce a m ba ncúèkïì rjeèe neè ncúèkïì ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mñkyeèe naè ka'. Beèe anaè a ba beèe ce muu njeèe aè m yuu neè vi bláá a fúr woweèe efa múè beèe enjep ñgoèñ naè.	They sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. No one could learn the song except the one hundred forty-four thousand, those who had been redeemed out of the earth.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba goè'sïì aè buu Nyúè, máâ kwaè'shi aèmboè ye, ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e goè'sïì wa'a foñ. Ñwáè aè ka' gee yuu bebep, mluè mi koo máè seê.	Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is caused to stumble, and I don't burn with indignation?
Jisoès aè laa neè Pitaè enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená tá nduñgúp ka' toñ neètú' e ntïìni nfeè' baa, aè be kani ñkaèraè' taar ená aè rïìñ máè ka'.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Most certainly I tell you, that you today, even this night, before the rooster crows twice, you will deny me three times."""
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèe yu boo Nyúè, Nyúè aè tuusïì Yú' muu yïì ená yi vú niñ njep viseèe mntee. Yú' ca yi geèe seèe ce ká' Nyúè enáê, “Baâa, Taèr.”	"And because you are children, God sent out the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, ""Abba, Father!"""
Vúè neè ye bgúâú bkúú, ba bgúâú beèe ce a m ba btu neè bsoogáè, ker ba bgúâú beâe bgoèrgoèr. Vúè neè ye bgúâú mnyaèabaèraè' ba bgúâú beèe ce a m ce cañ mbo. Vúè neè ye bgúâú beèe wááwá, káè yu bkwaèa áè, káè yu boo áè, káè yu beâe bgoèrgoèr áè, káè yu beâe bká'ká' áè, ye neè bgúèú efa gho.”	"that you may eat the flesh of kings, the flesh of captains, the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and of those who sit on them, and the flesh of all men, both free and slave, and small and great."""
Jisoès aè ka' yu' ená a fa Joân aè shañ, a kúti aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he withdrew into Galilee.
Ghèter vʉ àyaŋse.	Try and come tomorrow.
Weèr ka' ce yá mluè, weèe riñ ená weèr ce yá tá mi bo fa weèe ñger, keèr geèe tá weèe luêñ. Nyúè aè ka' fa weèr ñger, baná wee weèe foñ be koni ñger anaè tá weèe bo kur ntee, táá tatap njep ñgá' ce weèe ce yá aèmboè weèr ce yá na.	But if we are afflicted, it is for your comfort and salvation. If we are comforted, it is for your comfort, which produces in you the patient enduring of the same sufferings which we also suffer.
Tomas aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, weèr rïìñ faèdïì' ce aè ce duè ka', baná aède' weèr riñ nduunjïì anaè aè njáâá ká?”	"Thomas said to him, ""Lord, we don't know where you are going. How can we know the way?"""
Ŋkɛ̀ɛŋgèr à kɛ̀ɛ rtùu ca.	The landslide has eroded the hill.
Jesus à m̀ bɛʼshi mtuʼ brɛ̌d tâ a nyaŋ bèe ncʉ̀kì ta àgho.	Jesus broke five loaves of bread into pieces and fed five thousand people with.
Woowèe a ce rè bkòr banɛ sèe gapse woowèe.	They are fighting, so we should separate them.
Woweèe a rïìñ máè ká' ese aè nfeè' njïìsaèp seê. Woweèe a ka' koñ aè rlaèa, aède' a ku laa ená máè m ba moè' efa múè beèe ce a ke geèe mcáâr aè njáèá njïì ce a ke loo neè yaèp Nyúè ka', a cu aèmboè ñwáè Farïìsïî.	having known me from the first, if they are willing to testify, that after the strictest sect of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
“Baná weèe ka' ke yá yuu bsaèrbuu ce yi bepsi Ndap Nyúè e táá mboèmmbo ce Danïìyáèl ce e m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa aèmboè yi naè, aèmboè yi táá mbe dïû' rara embe Ndaèp Nyúè (Ñwáè ce e ce beè' ñwaè' ca rïîñ),	"When, therefore, you see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let the reader understand),
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	16	baná beèe ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a cañ duse aè mtuèu.	then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	17	Ñwáè ce e ka' ba mbe tu-ndap, ñgaèñ fa keèr suèu embo aè rloèr yïì buu embe yeâ ndap ka' cañ ka'.	Let him who is on the housetop not go down to take out things that are in his house.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	18	Ñwáè ce e ka' ba aè mñkúè, ñgaèñ fa keèr kúti aè rloèr yi cáè' ka' cañ ka'.	Let him who is in the field not return back to get his clothes.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	19	Be ba aè mnoèñ anaè tá mluè mi koo bbyeèñge ce a yu neè mmbúè, ba bbyeèñge ce a ce nyoñsi boo.	But woe to those who are with child and to nursing mothers in those days!
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	20	Loo neè ená weèe fa cañse aè cuèu saa káè nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè ka'.	Pray that your flight will not be in the winter, nor on a Sabbath,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	21	Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá ñgá' ba goèr seê, ba ba njáèá ñgá' ce e m be ba ka', káâ' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ, ba' seè'ni na, tá ñgá' moè' ke ba wa' ka'.	for then there will be great oppression, such as has not been from the beginning of the world until now, no, nor ever will be.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	22	Nyúè aè m geèe nfeè' ñgá' e ba nlúè'shi. E m tá baè geèe wa' ka', mbúè ñwáè aè m ba luèñ ka'. Nyúè aè m geèe e ba nlúè'shi wa'a njobeè' yïì beèe ce e m ce.	Unless those days had been shortened, no flesh would have been saved. But for the sake of the chosen ones, those days will be shortened.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	23	“Ñwáè aè ka' ke laa neè weèe aè nfeè' anaè enáê, ‘Yáê, a Kraâis anaè’ na, káè ená ‘A ye naè’, weèe fa byemi ka'.	Then if any man tells you, 'Behold, here is the Christ,' or, 'There,' don't believe it."
Beèe a ka' ce geèe buu ca neè máè aè nfeè' ce ce yi bii coèñ, baná yi ka' yuushi, yi ba aè njáâá ká?”	"For if they do these things in the green tree, what will be done in the dry?"""
Map mmbo mi sii.	Their hands are dirty.
Dávïìd aè m be du mbe buèu ka', geewa'a yu ba ye ce e m laèa enáê, ‘Tata aè m laèa neè yaè tata enáê, “Cu aè la rkoo maè' caar tá nfeè' gháá	"For David didn't ascend into the heavens, but he says himself, 'The Lord said to my Lord, ""Sit by my right hand,"
E no mcɛ̀p anà a ku keʼse mbe njì mnòŋ bbaa.	He swallowed the medicine and got well after two days.
Ŋwɛɛ Ŋkàʼ [ŋwɛ̄ː ŋkàʔ] cn 7.	month of December.
Weèe gee ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Njeè aè ka' ce yañ ñwáè ce e baèa wáè, aè fa ye byee. Ntee yi ka' yuushi ye, aè fa ye yuu tá e no. Wáè ka' gee wa'a, baná wáè cuè' mcuèñ mor mbe yeâ tu.”	"Therefore ""If your enemy is hungry, feed him. If he is thirsty, give him a drink; for in doing so, you will heap coals of fire on his head."""
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' ñwáè aè ka' kwe wáá, baná ñgaèñ aè luèñ efa buu bbebep.	For he who has died has been freed from sin.
Laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a gee buu bboèñboñ, ku' aè mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ, ba mmbo mntoo, koñ foñ aè rgaèp yaèp buu a beèe mo' weèe.	that they do good, that they be rich in good works, that they be ready to distribute, willing to communicate;
A m cúè'shi ku' blaêm, a tooshi mbe múè ndap embekïì mbe dïì' ce weèr aè m ba anaè.	There were many lights in the upper room where we were gathered together.
Tu ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a n ce too ená AÈnaèniyaès aè laa neè beèe ce a m táá aègee Pol ená woweèe a lip ye aè cuèu.	The high priest, Ananias, commanded those who stood by him to strike him on the mouth.
E ka' kuè bii ce laèa, mmbaè' vi nyáá, a ce cete woweèe, vi ka' ce cete woweèe wa'a, woweèe a wáp seê.	While he said these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them, and they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
Beèe magoèr a laashïì bcáè' njep nduunjïì, weèe mo' a sañsïì yap ba mmba' ce mká'ñká' ce a m faèashi.	Many spread their garments on the way, and others were cutting down branches from the trees, and spreading them on the road.
Fástoès aè ka' ce koèñ aè rgeèe tá nyor boñ Juês, e laa neè Pol enáê, “Wáè koèñ aè rduè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá m sa' wo mnsa' ca ba aèfo a?”	"But Festus, desiring to gain favor with the Jews, answered Paul and said, ""Are you willing to go up to Jerusalem, and be judged by me there concerning these things?"""
tá seèe bo ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' yi ñgeâe boèñboñ, loè koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè ce seèe ce keè' naè.	that, being justified by his grace, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
Jus a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè be ba' bfeè' mnta ka', a ce laèa wáná wáè m yá Abraèham ba aè njáâá ká?”	"The Jews therefore said to him, ""You are not yet fifty years old, and have you seen Abraham?"""
Baná aèmboè weèe aè foèosi neè Jisoès na, gheèter neè kyese buu moè' ca mbenduè le rbyemïì. Geèe neè ñgeâe boèñboñ ker riñ buu foñ.	Yes, and for this very cause adding on your part all diligence, in your faith supply moral excellence; and in moral excellence, knowledge;
Jisoès aè du a woweèe, a ka' baè' aètútú ndap ñwáè soogáè anaè, a tarte a beèe ce e ba tuu. E m tuu woweèe ená a du laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, fa fa ñgá' neè yoè nyor ka' njobeè' máè ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' aè niñ mbe máâ ndaèp ka'.	"Jesus went with them. When he was now not far from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, ""Lord, don't trouble yourself, for I am not worthy for you to come under my roof."
E m laèa wa'a tá yi bo kuè ghááte aèmboè e m laèa enáê, “Máè búsi ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe ce wáè m fa neè máè naè ka'.”	"that the word might be fulfilled which he spoke, ""Of those whom you have given me, I have lost none."""
Woweèe a ka' yá ená e yu ñwáè Juês, woweèe a ghaa aèbee aèmboè awaè baa wa'a, a ce laèa enáê, “AÈtámïìs ce aè rla' Áfásoès yu nyúâ ñgoèr.”	"But when they perceived that he was a Jew, all with one voice for a time of about two hours cried out, ""Great is Artemis of the Ephesians!"""
Máè koñ aè rrïìñ yuu ce a m laèa ená e geèe, a lor ye a du aègho mbe yaèp kansuèr.	Desiring to know the cause why they accused him, I brought him down to their council.
Mnoèñ vi ka' caèa taê, AÈnaèniyaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè lor bleebeèe ba loyaè moè' ce a m ce too ená Táètuloè, woweèe a du a suñ govanoè buu ce Pol aè m geèe.	After five days, the high priest, Ananias, came down with certain elders and an orator, one Tertullus. They informed the governor against Paul.
E siʼsi njàp nè mkùu.	He has crushed the vegetable with his feet.
Ndap à zhiʼse sê.	The house is too over crowded.
Ŋgwe à koo yàa mbʉ.	A dog has caught my goat.
Baná ka' ba aè nfeè' efá ce weèe ce ye byee ca, ce no enjep ndoñ ca, weèe ce suñ beèe aèmboè rkwe Tata Jisoès, caar tá e ke vúè.	For as often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
E yá'tïì yi tu nje ñguèñ Jisoès, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Tataê, ñwáè anaè yu nda?”	"He, leaning back, as he was, on Jesus' breast, asked him, ""Lord, who is it?"""
Mrɛ̀ʼ ca a mmap.	These yams are theirs.
geewa'a vi ke' taa mñgaèñ njep woweèe ka', ku cu ba nfeè' múcaèr. E ba aè nfeè' beèe a ce fa woweèe ñgá', káè buu vi ba btatap neè woweèe njo' nlaèa anaè, woweèe a ku kúti njïìnjïì.	They have no root in themselves, but are short-lived. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately they stumble.
Jisoès aè ka' suèu embe rtuèu, ku' beèe a du a yeâ mbuèu.	When he came down from the mountain, great multitudes followed him.
Nsuñ aèmboè Jisos kraâis aè taa mñgaèñ a weâe mú.	even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you:
Wàʼ mɛ ke yɛ wɛ̀ cɛʼcɛʼ a?	Do I always see you?
Byú' anaè yu mnyúâmkaè', a túr ñger aè rgeèe buu bbáèá. Byú' anaè vi m duè a yá bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá, a baashi woweèe aèbee tá a bo maè' bïìr a Nyúè weèe aè noèñ ce Nyúè ce ñger wááwá yi yu mba yeâ mmboè be duèñshi yi ñger.	for they are spirits of demons, performing signs; which go forth to the kings of the whole inhabited earth, to gather them together for the war of that great day of God, the Almighty.
msheè mi mú'ñgeèr, beèe Nyúè magoèr ce a m kweñger a fúú, a ba bteèe.	The tombs were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised;
Pol aè beesïì enáê, “M yu ñwáè Jus ce aè rla' Tasoâs aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè ce yu rla' ce li yu aètáèr ka'. Kyer wáè, maè'shi tá m laa yuu neè beèe ca.”	"But Paul said, ""I am a Jew, from Tarsus in Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. I beg you, allow me to speak to the people."""
Máè laèa cena neè weèe tá weèe bo koni cumúnyañ njep máè. Weèe be yá ñgá' njep ñgoèñ na. Ka' yi yu wa'a, kur neè ntee. Máè so ñgoèñ ca.”	"I have told you these things, that in me you may have peace. In the world you have oppression; but cheer up! I have overcome the world."""
E ka' yá woweèe, a laa enáê, “Duè neè du duñshi wee mnyor neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.” Woweèe a ka' ce duè, a ke'se aè nduunjïì.	"When he saw them, he said to them, ""Go and show yourselves to the priests."" It happened that as they went, they were cleansed."
A mlii ñgaâa ntuu ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú anaè na: Ñwáè entombïì aè m ba Saimúèn ce a ce too ená Pitaè, ba nfúr yïì ce Andruè, ba Jáêms, muu Sábáèdïî, ba nfúr yïì ce Joân,	Now the names of the twelve apostles are these. The first, Simon, who is called Peter; Andrew, his brother; James the son of Zebedee; John, his brother;
E m ku tuu ñwáè soogáè ená e du vú neè tu Joân. E du mbe shañ, a tee tu ese Joân,	Immediately the king sent out a soldier of his guard, and commanded to bring John's head, and he went and beheaded him in the prison,
Ñwáè Rjaè' ce yu Yú' Rara ce Taèr be tuu a máâ rlii, yu ñwáè ce e be vúè yá'ni weèe buu wááwá, geèe tá weèe kuushi buu ce máè suñ weèe wááwá.	But the Counselor, the Holy Spirit, whom the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and will remind you of all that I said to you.
Weèe aè luèñ efa buu bbebep, a ba bkwaèa neè ñgeâe yáánïì.	Being made free from sin, you became bondservants of righteousness.
Yi yu aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “E láè mi mmbo mtoo neè ñgaâa fuèp, yi ñgeâe boèñboñ yi ce kupse aè nfeè' moè' ka'.”	"As it is written, ""He has scattered abroad, he has given to the poor. His righteousness remains forever."""
Cu neè neè bfee-ñwáè, ce ke'nïî, njobeè' Sataèn ce e yu yeè ñwáè bbaèa ce kashi aèmboè búrúè' ce e ce waa wa'a, a ce roèo ñwáè ce e bo koo, ye.	Be sober and self-controlled. Be watchful. Your adversary, the devil, walks around like a roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour.
A mboè rbi Jisos Kraâis li m ba aè njáèá enáê. Yïì ma ce aè m ba Máèári aè m koo kwaèñ ese Josáèf ená e bo duè bguèu a ye. Tá a ye a ka' keèe rïìñni mnyor aèmboè nduu a nje, e ba neè rbúè aè ñger Yú' Rara. Josáèf aè lo a riñ ená e yu neè rbúè.	Now the birth of Jesus Christ was like this; for after his mother, Mary, was engaged to Joseph, before they came together, she was found pregnant by the Holy Spirit.
Woweèe a m duè foñ aè rgeèe tañshïì aèmboè ncir Tata Nyúè yi ce laèa. Yi yu mbo ená ñwáè ka' tá geèe tañshïì ca neè bbeâñ bbaa ka', e gee neè byoo buâu bbaa.	"and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the Lord, ""A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons."""
E yu ñwáè ce e rïìñ buu ce vi yu btatap neè seèe, a ce koosimnse neè seèe njobeè' ye ye ku ba aèmboè seèe. Rmoèoshïì li m vúè neè ye foñ aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá aèmboè li ke vúè neè seèe, geewa'a e ke' gwe ka'.	For we don't have a high priest who can't be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but one who has been in all points tempted like we are, yet without sin.
E beesïì enáê, “Cena yu ba yuu báèá! Ka' weèe rïìñ faèdïì' ce ñwáè ca ce vúè ka' wa'a, ñwáè ce e geèe máè ka' ce yá buu aè geèe ye.	"The man answered them, ""How amazing! You don't know where he comes from, yet he opened my eyes."
Ka' yi yu wa'a, Tata Jisoès yu ñwáè mini. E be fa weèe ñger, keè'ni weèe ese Sataèn ce e yu ñwáè bsaèrbuu.	But the Lord is faithful, who will establish you, and guard you from the evil one.
Taèr e ke sa' ñwáè ka', e fa ñger neè muu yïì ená e sa' beèe,	For the Father judges no one, but he has given all judgment to the Son,
Geewa'a, m ce suñ weèe yuu mini. Yi yu boèñboñ neè weèe ená m duê, njobeè' m ka' tá duè ka', Ñwáè Rjaè' vú cu weèe woweèe ka'. M ka' duê, m tuu ye tá e vú cu weèe woweèe.	Nevertheless I tell you the truth: It is to your advantage that I go away, for if I don't go away, the Counselor won't come to you. But if I go, I will send him to you.
[A m ce ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap, yi ba ená Pailáèt be fúr yaèp ñwáè moè' embe shañ, fa neè woweèe.]	Now he had to release one prisoner to them at the feast.
Weèe aè ka' loo buu ese Nyúè ke' túr vi ka', baná weâe loo neè mkwaè'shïû mmbembep. Weèe ce loo aè rkoni buu ce weèe ce tañ aè rtúr njep weâe mntee.	You ask, and don't receive, because you ask with wrong motives, so that you may spend it for your pleasures.
Weèe aè yá'ni a riñ buu seê, nfeè' aè ka' gháá ce weèe aè ba yá'ni beèe mo' foñ, weèr aè yá werná ñwáè moè' aè ba keèr yá'ni weèe buu Nyúè ce weèe aè m rïìñ efa rkáè' naè. Weèe ku bii nyoñ ba mmbee, ce weèe aè ba ghááte aè rye ba buu.	For although by this time you should be teachers, you again need to have someone teach you the rudiments of the first principles of the oracles of God. You have come to need milk, and not solid food.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a ker túr yuu laèa ka' njobeè' woweèe aè m yá aèmboè ñwáè ce e m kepñger anaè táá aègee Pitaè ba Joân.	Seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they could say nothing against it.
Embenjïì mo AÈlajaè aè ker loo, mbeèñ aè gweê, byee vi ká' a ce kuè'.	He prayed again, and the sky gave rain, and the earth brought forth its fruit.
Yi yu ená Muu Ñwáè yu Taèr ce e túr mmbomntaa Nyúè.”	"For the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath."""
Lòr mntaaŋguu kyèe fa mɛ̀.	Take four sticks and give me.
Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè bfúèlawaè vi ke kuè'. Vi ke faè' káè ba' bcáè' ka', ka' yi yu wa'a, m ce suñ weèe máná ka' bcáè' kúú ce Solomúèn aè m ce yar ce vi m boèñ se naè, mo' yi m boèñ aèmboè fúèlawaè ka'.	Consider the lilies, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin; yet I tell you, even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.
Bsoogáè foñ a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Yuu ce aède' weèr gee foñ yu ká?” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa koo mbaèa ese ñwáè moè' aè ñger ka', káè nya' mnde' mbe tu ñwáè moè' ka'. Weèe fa cáèñ mbaèa ce a ce laè' weèe aègho ka'.”	"Soldiers also asked him, saying, ""What about us? What must we do?"" He said to them, ""Extort from no one by violence, neither accuse anyone wrongfully. Be content with your wages."""
M ce suñ weèe máná ye ñgeâe yáánïì yi ka' tá caèa yïû ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba yïû beèe Farïìsi ka', baná aède' weèe niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka'.	For I tell you that unless your righteousness exceeds that of the scribes and Pharisees, there is no way you will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.
Jisoès aè m loâ aè to' anaè, a du fa yeâ laè'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du fa yeâ mbuu.	He went out from there. He came into his own country, and his disciples followed him.
Láè neè wee bkuè' ba mbe buèu mbe dïì' ce aède' mfyáp vi ye ka', nlo ye ka', byáèá vi kep mbo yáá buu ka'.	but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust consume, and where thieves don't break through and steal;
Baná weèe co' ñguâp nrúèú ce e m geèe weèe aè ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe ce weèe aè m geèe naè. Buu bbebep ce vi bo' weèe, weèe aè ce koèñ aè rgeèe vi naè vi bepsi weèe.	that you put away, as concerning your former way of life, the old man, that grows corrupt after the lusts of deceit;
Pitaè aè m táá yi ba njep ncúèúndúè' njepmbeè. Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès moè' aè m ba aèfo ce ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè m rïìñ. E m fúú njepmbeè a laa neè muunje ce e m táá aè ncúèúndúè' ená e ma'shi, e lor Pitaè a ye a niñ mbe mambe caè.	but Peter was standing at the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to her who kept the door, and brought in Peter.
Jisoès aè ka' loè fúú efa rkwe, woweèe a fúúseè enjep msheè, a niñ aè Rla' Rrara, a duñshi yaèp nyor neè beèe magoèr.	and coming out of the tombs after his resurrection, they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
Yeè ndeèe moè' yu ená a ka' ce ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap, m fúr ñwáè moè' embe shañ, fa neè weèe. Weèe ce koèñ weená m fúr ñkúú Jus fa neè weèe a?”	"But you have a custom, that I should release someone to you at the Passover. Therefore do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?"""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' máè m ba munte, máè m ce laèa buu aèmboè munte, a ce kwaè'shi buu aèmboè munte, a riñ buu aèmboè munte, máè ka' ba nleeñwáè, a borni buu bbonte.	When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I felt as a child, I thought as a child. Now that I have become a man, I have put away childish things.
Ñgá' mor, ba ñgá' njemor, ba ñgá' rúèú mkaèñ ce yi m fúú ekuè cuèu mnyaèabaèraè' ca naè aè m yú ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa beèe enjep ñgoèñ.	By these three plagues were one third of mankind killed: by the fire, the smoke, and the sulfur, which proceeded out of their mouths.
a bipshi ená, “Saimúèn ce li rlii mo' li yu ená Pitaè naè ce cu mbe ndaèp na a?”	and called and asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, was lodging there.
Mɛ̀ karsi nyor a kaʼ yɛ enɛ ŋwɛ̀ à ba ce vʉ mbe mɛ̌ njì.	I turned before discovering that someone was coming behind me.
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Wáè báèáñger njoká? M be to' wáè yuu ce njeñwáè ca ker ba nyaèa ce e túr btu saèamba a túr mdoñ rúú naè, a táá aètu mo.	"The angel said to me, ""Why do you wonder? I will tell you the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns."
See ke coʼ ŋgʉʉ efa bzhee tɛ bvi bo kùʼ.	We usually pull off weeds from crops so that they should grow.
Tu embe cor yi túr aè rba ñwáè ce aède' a taa ye aètu yuu mo' ka'. E be kuè túr ñgwa moè'sir, túr ntee bobor, túr bfee. E fa ba ñwáâ aèwaèa ka'. E be ba ñwáè ce aède' e sa' beèe yáánïì, riñ aè ryá'ni beèe yáánïì foñ.	The overseer therefore must be without reproach, the husband of one wife, temperate, sensible, modest, hospitable, good at teaching;
Weèe fa kwaè'shi ená m ku ce wápsi weèe ba neè mñwaè' ce m ce sañ na caè'caè' ka'.	that I may not seem as if I desire to terrify you by my letters.
Woweèe a ka' vúèshi ye mïìsi, a co' yap cáâ' beer caè, a lor bcáè' vi, a kúsi ye aè nyoèr, a lor ye a du aègho aè rtaa mbe kïìntaa.	When they had mocked him, they took the purple off of him, and put his own garments on him. They led him out to crucify him.
Nyúè yu ñwáè mini. E be kúsi mcucu' neè beèe ca njobeè' a ce fa weèe ñgá',	Since it is a righteous thing with God to repay affliction to those who afflict you,
Ñwáè ce e ka' tá koèñ Tata Jisoès ka', ndoèo co' ye. Yeèr Tataê, vúè.	If any man doesn't love the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Come, Lord!
Táá neè ba njep rkoèñnïì Nyúè aèmboè weèe ce keè' nfeè' ce Tata be koosimnse neè weèe, loèr weèe tá weèe woweèe cu nfeseè.	Keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ to eternal life.
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba bleebeèe a cuteè, a seesi aèmboè a be geèe ka' yú Jisoès.	Now when morning had come, all the chief priests and the elders of the people took counsel against Jesus to put him to death:
A suñ ye enáê, “Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt ce caèa.”	They told him that Jesus of Nazareth was passing by.
Ntɛ̀ʼ ce lùu.	The ambience is lively.
Ñgaâa ryá'nïì ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m ba mbe cor aè rla' Antïìyoèk, aè m ba Baènabaès ba Simïìyoèn ce a m ce too ená Ñwáâ Nsii, ker ba Lushoâs aè rla' Saèireên, ba Manáèn ce e m kuè' a Hároèd ce e m be sa' njeptii ñwáâ ñgoèr, ba Soêl.	Now in the assembly that was at Antioch there were some prophets and teachers: Barnabas, Simeon who was called Niger, Lucius of Cyrene, Manaen the foster brother of Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
E ku taŋte ba à mʉ ŋgàr moʼ mʉcàr sê.	It is hanging only on a very thin connection.
Beèe wááwá a be keè baèa weèe njo' máè. Geewa'a ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap du ba' aèlúèsimbuèu baná ñgaèñ be luèñ.”	You will be hated by all men for my name's sake, but he who endures to the end, the same will be saved.
Seèe aè rïìñ seená beèe a ke kaèa aè rlii ñwáè ce e caèa woweèe. Beèe a ke kaèa wa'a, yi ce geèe mntañshïì vi ce mïì efa múè beèe.	For men indeed swear by a greater one, and in every dispute of theirs the oath is final for confirmation.
E yuu bàa à rjèe a fyeni à mjèe tâ, banɛ e zhe sɛʼ à mjèe kyèe.	She bought a bag for one hundred francs and sold it at five hundred francs, therefore she has profited four hundred francs.
ntáè' Sábuloèn, ntáè' Josáèf ba ntáè' Bánjamáèn.	of the tribe of Zebulun twelve thousand, of the tribe of Joseph twelve thousand, of the tribe of Benjamin were sealed twelve thousand.
Cena a mbèp mòʼ efa ŋwàʼ ce e m saŋ nà.	This is one part of the book he wrote.
Bfúr waê, weèr ce cïìisi neè weèe aè rlii Tata Jisos Kraâis ená nfúr moè' ka' ba a weâe mú ce e ce koèñ aè rfaè' ka', a ce cu aèmboè weèr aè m yá'ni weèe ená weèe cu naè ka', weèe woweèe fa kar ka'.	Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you withdraw yourselves from every brother who walks in rebellion, and not after the tradition which they received from us.
Weèe ko'shi aègee Tata ce e yu luèr ce nteèe. Beèe a m maè' luèr ana, aè ba luèr ce Nyúè aè m ce, e luu ntaa neè ye seê.	coming to him, a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but chosen by God, precious.
Yú' a yuu ce yi ke fa ñwáè ryoèñ. AÈde' nyor gee yuu mo' ka'. Blaèa ce máè laèa neè weèe na, yu yú', aè ker ba ryoèñ.	It is the spirit who gives life. The flesh profits nothing. The words that I speak to you are spirit, and are life.
a nati mbekïì aè nfeè' byee anaè, a co'ni bcáâ' mo' efa nyoèr, a lor baètaèare a cúú njep mbuèu.	arose from supper, and laid aside his outer garments. He took a towel, and wrapped a towel around his waist.
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Rïìñ wáná ñwáè moè' embe wáâ ndúè' túr njáèá rlii ca ka'.”	"They said to her, ""There is no one among your relatives who is called by this name."""
AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, máè ba mbaè mmbo Yú' Nyúè, a yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè laèa embe máâ njïì aèmboè rsoèñ wa'a, enáê,	I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and I heard behind me a loud voice, like a trumpet
Ñwáè moè' yu ce e rïìñ buu Nyúè ka'. Ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce koèñ aè rrïìñ Nyúè ka'.	There is no one who understands. There is no one who seeks after God.
Beèe ce a m yu' yuu ce e m laèa na, a bipshïì enáê, “Baná ñwáè ce aède' e luñ yu ba nda?”	"Those who heard it said, ""Then who can be saved?"""
M be keèr bipshi yuu mo'. Waè' Nyúè aè maè' yïì beèe a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Má máè yu moè' efa beèe Isráèl. M yu ñwáè embe ndúè' Abraèhaêm, a ba ñwáè embe ntáè' Bánjamáèn.	I ask then, did God reject his people? May it never be! For I also am an Israelite, a descendant of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
Yaŋ anà zhi lʉ̀si nè rkwe.	That illness has resulted to death.
Agripaè aè laa neè Pol enáê, “Máè fa wáè njïì ená aè laa eku wáâ cuèu.” Pol aè naa bo mbekïì a laa yuu. E m laèa enáê,	"Agrippa said to Paul, ""You may speak for yourself."" Then Paul stretched out his hand, and made his defense."
Pitaè aè fúú njep mbeè a bú' rwar.	He went out, and wept bitterly.
Nyʉ̀ kaʼ saŋ m̀ yaatì wa bcɛ̀ʼ.	If the sun shines, I will dry my clothes.
Baná weèe ma' bsaèrbuu. Weèe fa keèr ce bo' beèe, káè ce bo' weâe btu, káè ce ko'ndoñ, káè ce sa'ni ka'.	Putting away therefore all wickedness, all deceit, hypocrisies, envies, and all evil speaking,
Ŋgàlaʼ à m caŋ a baa zhì mâ.	Ngala ran and embraced his mother.
Yi ku ba aèmboè a m sañ enáê, “Beèe wááwá a yu aèmboè mjáá, lap rboèñ li ku ba aèmboè fúèlawaè ce e ke kuè' aè rïìñ naè. Mjáá mi ke yopri, fúèlawaè karñgeèr.	"For, ""All flesh is like grass, and all of man's glory like the flower in the grass. The grass withers, and its flower falls;"
E ka' laèa wa'a, a juu woweèe embe koêr.	He drove them from the judgment seat.
E ku kwaʼshi nè zhii tu enɛ zhi bòŋ kaʼ.	She herself just thought that it is not nice.
Mú mnoèñ mo' vi ka' tuuse, Pol aè laa neè Baènabaès enáê, “Soè kúti ca'ni bfúr ce a yu aè bbu' mla' ce soè aè m feè'shi blaâa Tata aèfo naè, yá ená woweèe a ku cu yáánïì lá.”	"After some days Paul said to Barnabas, ""Let's return now and visit our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, to see how they are doing."""
Nyúè aè m yu' rboèñ neè beèe eluâuñgoèñ njobeè' woweèe a m byemi wa'a.	For by this, the elders obtained testimony.
Máè laèa wa'a, njobeè' ñwáè ce e m ka' ba ba ñkwaèa aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m ká' ye, e fúú seè'ni efa buu bbebep njobeè' a Tata a yu aèbee. Yi yu foñ ená ñwáè ce e m ba ñkwaèa aè nfeè' Nyúè aè m ká' ye ka', yu seè'ni ba ñkwaèa Jisos Kraêis.	For he who was called in the Lord being a bondservant is the Lord's free man. Likewise he who was called being free is Christ's bondservant.
Mbuèu njoká ce nfúr moè' e loè lor moè' du aègho mbe kor du táá kuèntombïì neè beèe ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis ka'?	But brother goes to law with brother, and that before unbelievers!
Yuu ce m ce laèa elúèsimbuèu yi yu ená aèmboè weèe Tata Jisoès weèe yu aèbee na, táá neè tatap, koni ñger ese ye ce e túr ñger goèr.	Finally, be strong in the Lord, and in the strength of his might.
Mgʉr mi mì mɛ̀, mɛ̀ ku jaa waʼa.	My oil has finished and I canʼt do anything about it.
Yap ntee yi ruu neè buu bbebep njáèá jáá jáèá jáá. Woweèe a ce geèe bsaèrbuu. Woweèe a lá mmir mbenduè buu beèe mo', a ce kwaè'shi bebep aèmboè beèe mo'. Woweèe a ce ko'ndoñ, a ce yúshi beèe, a ce reè bkoèr a beèe weèe, a ce bo' beèe, a túr mntee byayañ neè beèe, a ce cúè beèe, a ce sa' beèe.	being filled with all unrighteousness, sexual immorality, wickedness, covetousness, malice; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, evil habits, secret slanderers,
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, ñkoosimnse Nyúè aè m caèa ñger, e ker koñ seèe magoèr.	But God, being rich in mercy, for his great love with which he loved us,
Weèe be roèo máè, yá máè ka', njobeè' aède' weèe vú faèdïì' m be ba ka'.”	"You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come."""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè aè bto' wááwá fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè ñwáè wááwá.	"He said to them, ""Go into all the world, and preach the Good News to the whole creation."
E yu ñwáè ce a m geèe tañshïì aègho ená a bo foèosi seèe yïìseèe buu bbebep. A m ku gee wa'a a seâe tu caè' ka', aè m ba foñ aètu buu bbebep beèe wááwá.	And he is the atoning sacrifice for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.
Jisoès aè waa tatap aè nfeè' anaè, a kwe.	Jesus cried out with a loud voice, and gave up the spirit.
Wer à dù a baʼ soso a yuʼ nè wer btùʼ.	We arrived there and heard ourselves.
Ñwaè' ca aè sañ máâ Joân neè bcor saèambaê, ce vi yu aè ñgoâñ Ásïìyaè. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr ntee boèñboñ neè weèe ker fa weèe cumúnyañ. Ku ba ye ce e yu seè'ni na, aè ker ba Nyúè ce e m ba, aè ku ker ba ye ce e be keè vúè. Buu ca aè loè foñ ese Byú' saèambaê, ce vi táá kuèntombïì neè yi kaèbaèraè'.	John, to the seven assemblies that are in Asia: Grace to you and peace, from God, who is and who was and who is to come; and from the seven Spirits who are before his throne;
E ke gèe zhì buu àwàa sê.	He does his things very carelessly.
Fa kèr waa mbekì kaʼ.	Donʼt shout aloud again.
Ŋwɛ̀ anà à ba vʉ a dû.	The man came and went away.
Ŋwɛɛ Lùu [ŋwɛ̄ː lùː] cn 7.	month of November.
Ñkaè' yi ka' mïì, woweèe a natïì a ce kúti aè laè', Jisoès aè cu yi mbenjïì aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Yïì ta ba yïì ma a riñ ka'.	and when they had fulfilled the days, as they were returning, the boy Jesus stayed behind in Jerusalem. Joseph and his mother didn't know it,
Woweèe a ka' ce báèáñger aèmboè ca, beèe a m baa a nyáá, a táá fa waâp geñ. Bcáè' ce beèe anaè a m maè' vi m ce laè'ñger seê.	It happened, while they were greatly perplexed about this, behold, two men stood by them in dazzling clothing.
Njeñwáè moè' ce nyúèrkaè' aè m niñ njep muu yïì, aè m yu' ená Jisoès yu aèfo, a vúê, a gwe njep yeâ tïìi.	For a woman, whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, having heard of him, came and fell down at his feet.
E ghááte aè rjaè' beèe ce rmoèoshïì li vúè neè woweèe njobeè' rmoèoshïì li m vúè neè ye ye, e riñ ñgá' efa rmoèoshïì foñ.	For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to help those who are tempted.
Muu Ñwáè be kuè kwe aèmboè yi m ba aè rba, geewa'a, ndoèo be co' ñwáè ce e be fyeèni ye.”	"The Son of Man indeed goes, as it has been determined, but woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!"""
Nyúè ye ye aè koèñ ená beèe ce a be loè koni yuu ce e m kaè' neè woweèe naè, a riñ ghup ená e be kupse yuu ce e m laèa ka'. A mbuèu ce e m kaèa aè li rlii.	In this way God, being determined to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the immutability of his counsel, interposed with an oath;
Woweèe a m laèa ená a woweèe a cu aè mú nfeè' moè'. E kanïì.	When they asked him to stay with them a longer time, he declined;
Ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ker yá máè ka'. Geewa'a, weèe be yá máè. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' m cu nteèe, baná weèe be cu bteèe foñ.	Yet a little while, and the world will see me no more; but you will see me. Because I live, you will live also.
E ce gɛŋge nè ntʉŋ mdip.	He is moving and dangling with a pot of water.
Ñwáè aè ka' loo yuu ese wáè, aè fa ye yuu anaè. Ñwáè aè ka' koo yo yuu, aè fa keèr laèa ená ñgaèñ kúsi neè wáè ka'.	Give to everyone who asks you, and don't ask him who takes away your goods to give them back again.
Wèr be kù kèʼ caar tɛ e vʉ̂.	We will just wait until he comes.
Wɛ̀ koŋ à rlɛ̀ àmbommoo a?	Do you want to keep it on your own?
Nyúè aè geèe ená mbañruèñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka' koni bghoènïì ese ye njo' ñgwa yïì ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì. E ker gee foñ ená njeñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka' koni bghoènïì ese ye njo' nduu yïì ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì. Yi ka' tá baè ba wa' ka', boo wap aè ba ba boo bbebep, geewa'a, woweèe a yu brara.	For the unbelieving husband is sanctified in the wife, and the unbelieving wife is sanctified in the husband. Otherwise your children would be unclean, but now they are holy.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená be keèe ba aè noâñ mnsa' tá ñgá' aè rla' Sodoèm ba Goèmoraè ba aèndeèe neè ñgá' aè rla' anaè.	Most certainly I tell you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
Njáèá mmbañruè ce a bo' bbyeèñge na a baèa yuu ce yi yu mini aèmboè Jánïìs ba Jámbráès a m geèe neè Musïìs naè. Wap mntee vi yu bsii, lap rbyemïì li ba mini ka'.	Even as Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so do these also oppose the truth; men corrupted in mind, who concerning the faith, are rejected.
Jus a m ko'ndoñ neè woweèe, a du a yá ñgaâa bsaèrbuu mo' efa múè ñgaâa fa ñgá', woweèe a baashïì beèe, beèe anaè a ká' ñgá' aè múè la'. A ka' káè' ñgá', a cañ a du mbe ndaèp mbe Jasïìn aè rkoo Pol ba Silaès, fúr woweèe fa neè beèe.	But the unpersuaded Jews took along some wicked men from the marketplace, and gathering a crowd, set the city in an uproar. Assaulting the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the people.
Jisoès aè ka' yá lap rbyemïì, a laa neè ñwáè yañ anaè enáê, “Ñkaraè, máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep.”	"Seeing their faith, he said to him, ""Man, your sins are forgiven you."""
nan	to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever! Amen.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger yi ba mbe nshe yïû mboèñmboñ naè táá aètu beèe ce a yu' blaâa Nyúè, lá njep ntee boèñboñ seê, neè mini-ñwáè, ku', táá tatap, gee ñgúè.	That in the good ground, these are such as in an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it tightly, and bring forth fruit with patience.
Weèe aè m káè' neè Yú' Nyúè, a ce taè' mïìsi ba aè ye ñger njoká? Weèe yu blúr wa' njoká?	Are you so foolish? Having begun in the Spirit, are you now completed in the flesh?
Woweèe a ba' a cu aè rla' anaè, nfeè' rbi aè gháá.	It happened, while they were there, that the day had come that she should give birth.
A mbuèu ce wáè ka' tuu beèe ená a vú ká' máè, máè laa yuu mo' ka', a ku nati a ce vúè. M ce bipshi neè wáè ená wáè tuu beèe ená m vú gee ká lá.”	"Therefore also I came without complaint when I was sent for. I ask therefore, why did you send for me?"""
Yi ka' ba wa'a máè laa mánáê, ‘Tata Nyúè, a máè na. Máè tami nyor aè rgeèe buu wááwá ce wáè koèñ ená m geêe, aèmboè a sañ mbe yo ñwaè' mncir.’ ”	"Then I said, 'Behold, I have come (in the scroll of the book it is written of me) to do your will, O God.'"""
Buu wááwá ce beèe a geèe ce vi yu yáánïì ka', yu buu bbebep. Geewa'a, yuu bebep mo' yi yu aègho ce aède' yi gee ñwáè kwe ka'.	All unrighteousness is sin, and there is a sin not leading to death.
Jisoès aè ka' kuè yu' yuu ce yi koni, a loâ faèdïì' ce e m ba, a niñ mbe keñ, a du faè dïì' mo' ce ñwáè moè' aè m ker ba aèfo caa efa ye ka'. Beèe a ka' yu', a fúúse efa mla' wááwá, a jár neè mkuèu, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	Now when Jesus heard this, he withdrew from there in a boat, to a deserted place apart. When the multitudes heard it, they followed him on foot from the cities.
M ce laèa aèmbo ñgeâe bkwaèa tá yuu ce m ce laèa yi bo ba rara njobeè' yi yu tatap neè weèe aè rrïìñ buu ca neè bfee vïû ñwáè. AÈ m ba entombïì weèe aè fa weêe mnyor neè buu bbebep, a ce geèe ba bsaèrbuu. Baná weèe fa weêe mnyor seè'ni na ba neè ñgeâe yáánïì, tá weèe bo ba beèe Nyúè ce weèe yu brara.	I speak in human terms because of the weakness of your flesh, for as you presented your members as servants to uncleanness and to wickedness upon wickedness, even so now present your members as servants to righteousness for sanctification.
Lòr buu àtɛ̀r.	Take things easy.
E ke koèñ aè rjaè' beèe tá woweèe a bo rïìñ yuu ce yi yu mini.	who desires all people to be saved and come to full knowledge of the truth.
A be yoèñshi ye foñ njobeè' weèe yu mmbo mtoo neè woweèe, ker ba neè beèe wááwá.	while they themselves also, with supplication on your behalf, yearn for you by reason of the exceeding grace of God in you.
Rkoèñnïû neè Nyúè li yu ená seèe gee buu ce e ce laèa. Buu ce e ce laèa vi gha' seèe aè rgeèe ka',	For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments. His commandments are not grievous.
Sèe du ghanì njobèʼ a tòo fòo.	Let us hunt because they have burnt the bush.
E lòr mbàa embenjì.	She took a loan without consulting me.
Geèe neè buu wááwá ce weèe aè yá'ni ese máè, a koo ese máè, a yu' ese máè, a ker yá ese máè tá Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè cumúnyañ bo ba weèe woweèe.	The things which you learned, received, heard, and saw in me: do these things, and the God of peace will be with you.
Ŋgùŋ à làa e serna.	An ululation has sounded from that end.
Mɛ̀ sɛ̀ njobèʼ muu wàa ce yaŋ sê.	I am very disappointed because my child is very ill.
Yi ba wa'a, baná yi ntee yi gaèp nyor aè buu bbaa. Boo mñgoèñgoè ba bbyeèñge ce a túr bduu ka', a ke kwaè'shi aèmboè buu Tataê. Woweèe a loè lor waêp mntee ba waêp mnyor wááwá fa neè Nyúè. Bbyeèñge ce a túr bduu a loè kwa'shi ba aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ na njobeè' woweèe a koèñ ená a gee tá nyor boñ bduu wap.	There is also a difference between a wife and a virgin. The unmarried woman cares about the things of the Lord, that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she who is married cares about the things of the world--how she may please her husband.
Wáè rïìñ wáná beâe aè ñgoèñ Áshaè wááwá a maè'shi máè, máè ba mamñgi'. Beèe mo' efa woweèe aè m ba Fugáloès ba ÁÈmogánïìs.	This you know, that all who are in Asia turned away from me; of whom are Phygelus and Hermogenes.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Seèe du aè mla' mo' tá m du feè'shi aèfo foñ. A yuu ce máè m vúè aètu mo.”	"He said to them, ""Let's go elsewhere into the next towns, that I may preach there also, because I came out for this reason."""
Jisoès aè ka' yá aèmboè Máèári ce war, keèr yá aèmboè Jus ce a Máèári weèe a m ce vúè naè a ce warse, yi joo ye seê, mluè mi koo ye.	When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews weeping who came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled,
M ce laèa buu ca, aè ke' ku laèa ba máè ka', ncir Nyúè yi laèa wa' foñ.	Do I speak these things according to the ways of men? Or doesn't the law also say the same thing?
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè m duèñshi máè rdip ce li ke fa ryoèñ, li ce laè'ñger aèmboè glaês. Rdip anaè li m ce fúú enje kaèbaèraè' ce túr Nyúè ba muu njeèe.	He showed me a river of water of life, clear as crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb,
Woweèe a m ku yu' ba buu ce beèe a m ce laèa aèmboè máè. Beèe a m ce laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e m ce fa ñgá' neè seèe naè ce feè'shi seè'ni ba aèmboè rbyemïû neè Jisos Kraêis, ce e m ce koèñ ená li ba ka' naè.”	"but they only heard: ""He who once persecuted us now preaches the faith that he once tried to destroy."""
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè boo ñkúú, a be keèe fúr woweèe embo, maè' aè dïì' ce ku ba ba túè'nji, ce beèe a ce warse ce kúr msoèñ aèfo.”	"but the children of the Kingdom will be thrown out into the outer darkness. There will be weeping and gnashing of teeth."""
Woweèe a ká' a ce fa Jisoès ñgá' njobeè' buu ce e m geèe nyúè mmbomntaa.	For this cause the Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought to kill him, because he did these things on the Sabbath.
Muunje moè' ce e m ba ñwáè rfaè' aè yá aèmboè e cu a ce yár mor, e fyá' ye mbe mmïìr, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè m ba a Jisoès foñ.”	"A certain servant girl saw him as he sat in the light, and looking intently at him, said, ""This man also was with him."""
Mkuu mi waŋger e.	The beans have exploded.
Mbuèu ce wáè ba laèa buu ca neè woweèe yu ená woweèe a bo koèñ beèe. Rkoèñnïì ca li ba ba aè nfeè' ce ñwáè aè ka' túr ntee rara, yi ntee yi ke' ce fa ye ñgá' ka' njobeè' e geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ, a byemi neè mini-ñwáè.	but the goal of this command is love, out of a pure heart and a good conscience and sincere faith;
Cuèu yi ce luèu ye aè ryá weèe, mluè mi ce koo ye njobeè' e rïìñ ená weèe aè yu' yi yañ.	since he longed for you all, and was very troubled, because you had heard that he was sick.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e ce suèu embe buèu. E m túr ñger goèr seê. Yïì nyor aè m ce raa, rraa efa yeâ nyor anaè li raa aè ñgoèñ wááwá.	After these things, I saw another angel coming down out of the sky, having great authority. The earth was illuminated with his glory.
“Vúè neè vú yá ñwáè ce e suñ máè buu wááwá ce máè m ce geèe. Seemoè' ñwáè anaè a Kraêis.”	Come, see a man who told me everything that I did. Can this be the Christ?
Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèe aè buu mo' efa buu wááwá ce Yú' Tata Nyúè yi ke fa neè beèe ka', aèmboè weèe cu seè'ni ce keè' nfeè' ce weèe be keè yá Jisos Kraâis na.	so that you come behind in no gift; waiting for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ;
Baná seèe yoñshi Nyúè ce e fa seèe dïû' kúú ce aède' ñwáè ci' ka'. Seèe yu'ni neè ye, gú'shi neè ye neè rbonïì-ñwáè aè njáèá njïì ce ye ye koèñ. Seèe wáp ye foñ.	Therefore, receiving a Kingdom that can't be shaken, let us have grace, through which we serve God acceptably, with reverence and awe,
Bkar waê, aèmboè Nyúè aè geèe mkaè'ni ca neè seèe, seèe raasi viseèe btu efa buu wááwá ce vi ce bepsi viseèe mnyor ba viseèe byú'. Seèe ce wáp Nyúè, fa viseèe btu wááwá neè ye, ce gee ñgeâe rara aè buu wááwá.	Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from all defilement of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.
M rïìñ máná weèe be loè rïìñ weèr boèñboñ. Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè kwaè'shi máná m be caè'ni weèe entoèmbïì tá weèe bo lu'shi ñkaèraè' baa.	In this confidence, I was determined to come first to you, that you might have a second benefit;
Bèe ce a maʼshi nàʼ à làʼ gòr yu Mbòroro.	Most of those who rear cows in the village are the Bororos.
Ñgaâa ntaa caè a be laèa enáê, “Buu wááwá ce wáè m koèñ naè vi mïì. Yo foèo ba ku' buu ce wáè m túr naè vi mïì. AÈde' aè ker túr buu anaè ka'.”	The fruits which your soul lusted after have been lost to you, and all things that were dainty and sumptuous have perished from you, and you will find them no more at all.
Ñwaè' ca aè sañ máâ nleeñwáè neè njeñwáè ce a ce, ker ba boo vi ce m koèñ neè mini-ñwáè. Ku ba ba máè caè'caè' ce m koèñ weèe ka'. Beèe wááwá ce a rïìñ yuu mini a koèñ weèe foñ,	The elder, to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth; and not I only, but also all those who know the truth;
Jisoès aè ka' rïìñ ená woweèe a m ce de'ñger njobeè' yuu ce e m laèa na, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cena yi bep weèe a?	"But Jesus knowing in himself that his disciples murmured at this, said to them, ""Does this cause you to stumble?"
Moè' efa beèe a mmbaa ca ce e m yu' yuu Joân aè m laèa a du aèmbuèu Jisoès foñ naè aè m ba Andruè nfúr Saimún Pitaè.	One of the two who heard John, and followed him, was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother.
Jisoès aè m niñ aè rla' Jáèrikuè a to'ni rla' anaè a ce caèa.	He entered and was passing through Jericho.
Mɛ̀ m dù mbǎa.	I went there.
Rkòŋ tʉʼ rli m sòp ye mbe njì.	Cancer affected him on the back.
Mɛ̀ gèe rfàʼ anà jòr sê.	I did this work very easily.
Muu ca e ke fyɛ̀p sê.	This child is too greedy.
Bbyeèñge foñ a ba yu'ni neè bduu wap, bduu wap mo' a ka' ba ce a byemi blaâa Nyúè ka' tá yap ñgeèe yi bo geèe woweèe tá a byemi ce woweèe a laèa yuu mo' neè woweèe ka',	In the same way, wives, be in subjection to your own husbands; so that, even if any don't obey the Word, they may be won by the behavior of their wives without a word;
Jisoès aè ciisïì neè ye enáê, “Yáê, fa suñ ñwáè ka'. Duè duñshi yoè nyor neè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì embe Ndaèp Nyúè, gee tañshïì ce Musïìs aè m laèa ená ñwáè yañ msaèasïì gee tá beèe a bo rïìñ ená ñwáè anaè aè keè'se naè.”	"Jesus said to him, ""See that you tell nobody, but go, show yourself to the priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded, as a testimony to them."""
Jisoès aè m suñ woweèe rara enáê, “Lasoèroès aè kwe.	"So Jesus said to them plainly then, ""Lazarus is dead."
A máè cuâu ñka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' caa njïì enjep máè baná ñgaèñ be luèñ efa ñgá'. E be niñ mbo aè nfeè' ce e gwáá, koni yuu ye.	I am the door. If anyone enters in by me, he will be saved, and will go in and go out, and will find pasture.
E be keè duè entombïû neè ye neè njáèá yú' ker ba ñger ce AÈlajaè aè m túr, tá e bo geèe tá btar boo a boo wap weèe a kúti aèbee, geèe tá beèe ce a teèe btu a túr bfee aèmboè beèe ce a yu yáánïì a túr, tá beèe Nyúè a bo tami nyor aè rkoni Tataê.”	"He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah, 'to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children,' and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just; to prepare a people prepared for the Lord."""
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weâe ce duè, ñwáè fa loèr yuu mo' ka', ka' mbaèñ, ka' baèa, ka' bráêd, ka' mbaèa, ka' cáè' áè, ñwáè fa loèr ka'.	"He said to them, ""Take nothing for your journey--neither staffs, nor wallet, nor bread, nor money; neither have two coats apiece."
Geewa'a, m ce sañ nlaâa fi neè weèe ce yi ce duèñshi nyor njep Kraêis, ker ba njep weèe foñ. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' túè'nji ce fa njïì, rraa ce mini li ká' a ce raa.	Again, I write a new commandment to you, which is true in him and in you; because the darkness is passing away, and the true light already shines.
Yuu anà zhi yu fyɛ̀pte.	That thing is airless.
Wáè ka' gee wa' baná aè be ba ñwáè rboâñtu njobeè' woweèe a túr yuu mo' ce aède' a la' wáè aègho ka'. Nyúè be keè laè' wáè aè nfeè' ce beèe ce a yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè a be keè fúú efa rkwe.”	"and you will be blessed, because they don't have the resources to repay you. For you will be repaid in the resurrection of the righteous."""
Baná seèe fa ce buumi aèmboè beèe mo' a ce geèe naè ka'. Seèe ce ke'se, tami nyor.	so then let's not sleep, as the rest do, but let's watch and be sober.
Máâ suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná, ñwáè ce e ka' tá koo kúú Nyúè aèmboè muu ñká' ka', aède' e ke niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè anaè ka'.”	"Most certainly I tell you, whoever will not receive the Kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it."""
Seèe yoñshi Tata Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê. Yu ye ce e ghoèni seèe neè buu embe buèu. E ghoèni seèe neè buu ca njobeè' seèe yu beèe Jisos Kraêis.	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly places in Christ;
Ñgaâa mnde' anaè a ku ce koèñ ená woweèe a koni sá' efa buu wááwá. Woweèe a be bo' weèe neè mnde' tá a bo ye sá' efa mnde' anaè. Yu nfeè' njïìsaèp aèmboè Nyúè ce e be sa' mnsa' beèe teni aè tami nyor aè rfa woweèe ñgá' njo' yaèp ndeâe mbembep anaè. Ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá e misi woweèe nfeseè.	In covetousness they will exploit you with deceptive words: whose sentence now from of old doesn't linger, and their destruction will not slumber.
Baná seèe be laèa seeká? Waè' seèe be laèa seená Nyúè aè m geèe yuu mini ka' a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr.	What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness with God? May it never be!
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ máná weèe riñ buu moè' kuu bfee ce Yú' Nyúè yi ke fa neè beèe.	Now concerning spiritual things, brothers, I don't want you to be ignorant.
Atà m̀ ̀ beʼ ŋwàʼ ca.	I am able to read this book.
tá ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè ye, e bo koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
a m bipshi neè Joân enáê, “Wáè ka' tá ba Kraâis anaè ka', ba AÈlajaè ka', ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce Nyúè aè m laèa ená e be tuu naè ka', wáè ka' ce baèptir beèe njoká?”	"They asked him, ""Why then do you baptize, if you are not the Christ, nor Elijah, nor the prophet?"""
Yi ka' ba ená a be koo ñwáè fa aè shañ baná aède' ñgaèñ buu efa rduè shañ ka'. Yi ka' ba ená a be yú ñwáè neè saè' baná a be kuè yú ye ba aègho. AÈmboè yi yu aè njáâá wa'a, baná beèe Nyúè a ba táá tatap, láè ntee ba neè Taèr Nyúè.	If anyone is to go into captivity, he will go into captivity. If anyone is to be killed with the sword, he must be killed. Here is the endurance and the faith of the saints.
Baná weèe ce weèe yu Jus ka' na, weèe ker bii bkïìloè káè beèe ce a ce caèa caèa ka', weèe yu boo ñgaâa nshe weèe beèe Nyúè weèe, a ba beèe embe ndaèp Nyúè.	So then you are no longer strangers and foreigners, but you are fellow citizens with the saints, and of the household of God,
AÈmboè yi yu wa' na, m ce wáp máná Sataèn be jepsi btu ese weèe aèmboè e m loèr vi bkwáèá a bo' Ef aègho naè, tá weèe ker láè ntee njep Jisos Kraêis, fa wee mnyor neè ye ka'.	But I am afraid that somehow, as the serpent deceived Eve in his craftiness, so your minds might be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.
Ryoèñshïì ba mcáp mi ke kuè ce fúú ekuè cuâu mo'sir. Bfúr waê, yi boèñ wa' ka'.	Out of the same mouth comes forth blessing and cursing. My brothers, these things ought not to be so.
Saè' mbyáèráñ aè m fúú eku yeâ cuèu. AÈ m ba saè' ce e be so bto' ce a baèa ye aègho. E be loèr yïì mbaèñ kúú ce a geèe neè bco', sa' woweèe aègho. E be nyáèñ gráâp ce a m ceni naè njep beè'teè ce a ke nyáèñ. Rnyáèñ efa gho li táá aètu ku' rshentee Nyúè ce ñger wááwá yi yu mba yeâ mmboè.	Out of his mouth proceeds a sharp, double-edged sword, that with it he should strike the nations. He will rule them with an iron rod. He treads the winepress of the fierceness of the wrath of God, the Almighty.
E ke ba nètʉʼ ŋgòŋ zhi ce sii.	In the night, places are dark.
Wer ke loo aè nfeè' wááwá ce kuushi weèe ker ce yoèñshi Nyúè njo' weèe.	We always give thanks to God for all of you, mentioning you in our prayers,
Ncǎrkwe e ke ba ncòo rkwe.	Small termites are the sign of death.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, bfúr vi a laa neè ye enáê, “Naètïû aèfa, du aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè tá ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a bo yá mfaè' ce aè ce geèe na.	"His brothers therefore said to him, ""Depart from here, and go into Judea, that your disciples also may see your works which you do."
AÈmboè weèr ce cu njep ñgoèñ na, rkwe li ce rúèú wer aè nfyeènyú aè nfeè' wááwá njo' Kraêis, tá li ryoèñ li bo yááti nje weâr mnyoèr ce vi be loè kweñger naè.	For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus' sake, that the life also of Jesus may be revealed in our mortal flesh.
Nyaèa anaè aè m ba nteèe a ker bii nteèe seè'ni ka'. E be fúú enjeèp rwee ce lúèsimbuèu yu aègho ka' naè, tá a lo yú ye tá e kwe dúèdúè. Beèe ce a ce cu njep ñgoèñ na a be yá nyaèa ca, báèáñger seê. Beèe ca yu beèe ce a m sañ map mlii mbe ñwaè' ryoèñ ka', tá ñgoèñ yi ka' keè ba aègho. Woweèe a be báèáñger njobeè' nyaèa ca aè m ba nteèe a ker bii nteèe seè'ni ka, keèr loè kúti nteèe.	The beast that you saw was, and is not; and is about to come up out of the abyss and to go into destruction. Those who dwell on the earth and whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world will marvel when they see that the beast was, and is not, and shall be present.
Nyúè aè m loèr nfaèñ mbañruèñwáè a boo njeñwáè aègho, njeñwáè ye ye aè ba ñwáè ce e ke bi mbañruèñwáè. Buu ca wááwá aè m geèe ba Nyúè.	For as woman came from man, so a man also comes through a woman; but all things are from God.
Rfaè' ce tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì e ke geèe li yu ená e koo buu ce beèe a fa, ker ba buu tañshïì, gee tañshïì aègho. Baná yi m ba boèñboñ ená tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce e táá a seâe btuè mbe buèu naè túr yuu mo' ce ye ye be fa neè Nyúè foñ.	For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. Therefore it is necessary that this high priest also have something to offer.
Jisoès aè karsïì nyor, a yá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Muu waè, kur ntee, lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè ke'seè.” Njeñwáè anaè aè ku ke'se aè nfeè' anaè.	"But Jesus, turning around and seeing her, said, ""Daughter, cheer up! Your faith has made you well."" And the woman was made well from that hour."
“Yaè Ta aè fa buu wááwá mba máâ mmboè. Ñwáè moè' rïìñ muu caa efa Taèr ka', ñwáè moè' aè rïìñ Taèr caa efa muu ker ba beèe ce muu aè koèñ aè rduèñshi ye neè woweèe ka'.	All things have been delivered to me by my Father. No one knows the Son, except the Father; neither does anyone know the Father, except the Son, and he to whom the Son desires to reveal him.
Weèr aè ka' loâ aè rla' Trowaès, a niñ mbe keñ, a duê, a táá aè dïì' mo' ka', caar a ba' aè rla' Soèmatáráès. Túè' aè ka' raa, weèr aè ba' aè rla' Nïìyapolïìs.	Setting sail therefore from Troas, we made a straight course to Samothrace, and the day following to Neapolis;
Mnoèñ vi m caèa aèñgoo seê, weèr aè be yá rlir nyúè káè mkaèñsïì ka', nteèendúñ aè ku ce caèa tatap seê. Weèr aè riñ ená aède' weèr luñ efa gho ka'.	When neither sun nor stars shone on us for many days, and no small storm pressed on us, all hope that we would be saved was now taken away.
Seèe rïìñ seená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce a m taa Kraâis mbe kïìntaa naè, a m taa njáèá ñwáè ce seèe aè m ba naè mbo foñ tá a bo yú yïìseèe ndeâe mbembep, faè dïì' seèe bo keèr ba bkwaèa neè buu bbebep ka'.	knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, that the body of sin might be done away with, so that we would no longer be in bondage to sin.
Máè ker yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè embe buèu, a túr saâ' ncáncáp mbaè boè foñ.	Another angel came out from the temple which is in heaven. He also had a sharp sickle.
Bfúr waê, baná yuu mo' yi yu ce seèe be kuè geèe, aè ke' ba ená seèe yu'ni neè nyor, cu ba aèmboè e ce koèñ ka'.	So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after the flesh.
Buu ca aè ka' mïì wáá, Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'nïì yïì buu a natïì a du aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, e cu a woweèe aèfo, a baptir beèe.	After these things, Jesus came with his disciples into the land of Judea. He stayed there with them, and baptized.
e yáátïì neè beèe ce a woweèe a m jáâr aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du a ba' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm naè, aè mnoèñ aèñgoo. Woweèe a ce suñ yïìseèe beèe seè'ni aèmboè ye.	and he was seen for many days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are his witnesses to the people.
Woweèe a m ker ce roèo aè rkoo ye, e fúú efa waâp mú a duê.	They sought again to seize him, and he went out of their hand.
AÈde' ñwáè moè' máñnïì buu ca ka', baná ñwáè moè' fa keèr fa ñgá' ka'. Cu neè múnyañ.	Seeing then that these things can't be denied, you ought to be quiet, and to do nothing rash.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a duñshi woweèe mi mmbo ba mi mkuèu.	When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet.
Beèe ce a m vúè a Máèári weèe naè, a m yá yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe, beèe magoèr efa waâp mú a byemïì neè ye.	Therefore many of the Jews, who came to Mary and saw what Jesus did, believed in him.
Beèe a m vúè aè bkúr aè bkúr a yá Joân ená e baptir woweèe. Joân aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Boo bfïî, ñwáè ce e báá weèe ená weèe cañ soèrti efa rshentee ce Nyúè be ko'si neè beèe naè, aè báá nda?	"He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be baptized by him, ""You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?"
Weèr aè ka' fa' a weâe mú, bye buu ce aè yú' njep weâe mntee, yi ke' ba yáánïì ená weèr aè ba koni buu ce vi be geèe tá weèr cu rcu ryáánïì ese weèe a?	If we sowed to you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap your fleshly things?
“Weèe ce ká' máè enáê ‘Tataê, Tataê’, a ce geèe buu ce m ce suñ weèe ka' njoká?	"Why do you call me, 'Lord, Lord,' and don't do the things which I say?
Luke	Luêk	6	47	Ñwáè ce e ka' vú yá máè, yu' yuu ce m ce laèa, gee yi, baná m be duèñshi weèe njáèá ñwáè ce ñgaèñ yu.	Everyone who comes to me, and hears my words, and does them, I will show you who he is like.
Luke	Luêk	6	48	E yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e m ce baè'ri yïì ndap, a tuñ kuèu yi suu boèñboñ seê, a táá mbenduè ryáá, e boo kuèu ndap mbo. Rdip li ka' ruu cirshi ndap anaè, a gee yuu mo' aègho ka' njobeè' a m baè'ri ye yáánïì.	He is like a man building a house, who dug and went deep, and laid a foundation on the rock. When a flood arose, the stream broke against that house, and could not shake it, because it was founded on the rock.
Luke	Luêk	6	49	Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e ka' yu' yuu ce m ce laèa, gee yi ka', baná ñgaèñ yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e m ce baè'ri yïì ndap, a tuñ kuèu ka'. Rdip li ka' ruu cïìr ndap anaè, e ku kááñger a gweê, a koo yuu efa gho ka'.”	But he who hears, and doesn't do, is like a man who built a house on the earth without a foundation, against which the stream broke, and immediately it fell, and the ruin of that house was great."
Beèe a ka' yá ca, a wáp seê, a yoñshi Nyúè aè njáèá ñger ce e fa neè beèe naè.	But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled and glorified God, who had given such authority to men.
Cena yi ka' mïì, bcïìndap Nyúè saèamba ce a m túr msoèñ saèamba naè a tamïì nyor aè rfyáp msoèñ anaè.	The seven angels who had the seven trumpets prepared themselves to sound.
Jisoès aè m tuu beèe ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ca, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa duè aè ñgoâñ beèe enje jáá, káè aè mla' beâe aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè ka'.	"Jesus sent these twelve out, and commanded them, saying, ""Don't go among the Gentiles, and don't enter into any city of the Samaritans."
Dïì' ce woweèe a m vúè táá aèfo anaè aè m ba dïû' boèñboñ aè rcu aè saa ka'. Beèe magoèr a fa ntañ ená a gheter yá ená a be baè' aè rla' Fenïìs cu ba aèfo lá. Fenïìs aè m ba dïì' moâ' aè to' Kreât ce bkeñ vi m ce vúè ce táá, ka' ker ce co'ti ce duè. AÈ m ba dïì' ce wáè m ka' ba táá ce keè' mbaè mbuèuntii, aè ku yá rdip aè yo bo ñkoèp ba yo bo maè'.	Because the haven was not suitable to winter in, the majority advised going to sea from there, if by any means they could reach Phoenix, and winter there, which is a port of Crete, looking northeast and southeast.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “AÈ rla' Bátáèláèháêm, aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè. Ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m sañ enáê,	"They said to him, ""In Bethlehem of Judea, for this is written through the prophet,"
Bcɛ̀ bwaa bvi sii kaʼ.	My clothes are not dirty.
Woweèe a m yu' yuu ce e m ce laèa boèñboñ njobeè' yi fii ce e m geèe aè bfeè' aèñgoo, beèe a bááñgeèr naè.	They listened to him, because for a long time he had amazed them with his sorceries.
Jisoès aè niñ mbe keñ, a ker tuu neèñguu roè, a du a ba' fa yeâ laè'.	He entered into a boat, and crossed over, and came into his own city.
Njáèá ñgeèe ca yi fa keèe ba fa weâe mú ka'. Yi yu ba ená ñwáè efa weâe mú ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rba ñwáâ ñgoèr, baná ñgaèñ ba ñwáè rfaè' neè weèe,	It shall not be so among you, but whoever desires to become great among you shall be your servant.
Yǎanà a ncʉʼ efagho.	That is transferred aggression.
Weèe aè duè aèmbuèu Jisoès ce e m loèr yïì nyor a fa neè Nyúè, Nyúè aè ye leè' aègho a ñwáè naè wáá. Weèe aè láè mmir ba mbenduè bláá Jisoès ce a m ñwañshi, yuu ce bláá anaè vi táá aètu mo yi caèa yuu ce bláá Ábáèl vi m táá aètu mo.	to Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better than that of Abel.
E fúr Baèrabaès embe shañ, a fa neè woweèe, a laêa, a lip Jisoès neè yáánsoè. A ka' lïìp wáá, a fa ená a taa ye mbe kïìntaa.	Then he released to them Barabbas, but Jesus he flogged and delivered to be crucified.
Wáè ka' suñ buu ca neè bfúr enjep Jisos Kraâis baná aè yu ñwáè rfaâ' mboèñmboñ neè Jisoès, a ce duèñshi ená aè ce nyañ yoè nyor neè blaèa ce vi kuèu rbyemïì, ker ba ryá'nïû rboèñboñ ce wáè ku táá njo naè.	If you instruct the brothers of these things, you will be a good servant of Christ Jesus, nourished in the words of the faith, and of the good doctrine which you have followed.
Beèe mo' a ba a Pol aèbee, a byemi. Beèe mo' efa beèe ca aè m ba Daèyonishoès ce e m ba ñwáè embe rcuteè AÈropagoès anaè, ker ba njeñwáè ce a m ce too ená Damáreès, ker ba beèe mo'.	But certain men joined with him, and believed, among whom also was Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.
Nyor ce bòni Siŋkɛ,seemòʼ tu zhi be luu ye.	Singke is getting weak, may be she will be attacked by headache.
E ka' laèa wa'a, msaèasïì mi ku lo ye efa nyoèr, e ba nrara.	When he had said this, immediately the leprosy departed from him, and he was made clean.
AÈmboè beèe magoèr a m ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep njobeè' nteèetu ñwáè moè'sir naè, yi yu foñ ená beèe magoèr a be ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' ñwáè moè'sir aè m yu'ni neè Nyúè.	For as through the one man's disobedience many were made sinners, even so through the obedience of the one, many will be made righteous.
E m laèa neè woweèe wááwá enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ aè rvúè fa máâ mbuèu, baná ñgaèñ kani yïì nyor, byá' yi kïìntaa aè mnoèñ wááwá, ce vú fa máâ mbuèu,	"He said to all, ""If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, take up his cross, and follow me."
Baná, tá Nyúè ce e ke fa beèe cumúnyañ njep ntee, fa weèe buu bboèñboñ tá weèe bo geèe buu ce e ce koèñ ená weèe aè ba geèe. Tá e fa' njep viseèe mntee, gee tá seèe ba njáèá beèe ce e koèñ ená seèe aè ba ba, aè ñger Jisos Kraêis. Tá beèe a ku'si Jisos Kraâis nfeseè. Yi yu wa'a.	make you complete in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Yi loè gee ye, e gwe aè nsheè, bdúdú' vi fúú ye aè cuèu, e ce kúr msoèñ, tee mbaè yáá. Máè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu máná a fúr yú' anaè, woweèe a moo laèr.”	"and wherever it seizes him, it throws him down, and he foams at the mouth, and grinds his teeth, and wastes away. I asked your disciples to cast it out, and they weren't able."""
Máè yá yuu mo' yi feeseè rdip rgoèr ce a geèe neè glaâs ce a fïìñshi mor aè múè mo. Máè yá beèe ce a m so nyaèa ba blañ nyaèa caè, ba nombaè rlii nyaèa anaè aèmboè a tááte aèwaâa rdip rgoèr a túr mluñ Nyúè mbaè mmboè.	I saw something like a sea of glass mixed with fire, and those who overcame the beast, his image, and the number of his name, standing on the sea of glass, having harps of God.
Máè m geèe wa'a njobeè' máè m koèñ máná weèe byemi ba njo' ñger Nyúè, ke' ba ba njo' bfee ñwáè ka'.	that your faith wouldn't stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
E fyá' mbekïì, a beesi enáê, “M ce yá aèmboè beèe a ce jáèshi, a ba aèmboè bce wa'a.”	"He looked up, and said, ""I see men; for I see them like trees walking."""
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', e ker du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè. Beèe wááwá a du a yá ye mbo. E cu aè nsheè a ce yá'ni woweèe.	Now very early in the morning, he came again into the temple, and all the people came to him. He sat down, and taught them.
Buu bbebep vi be kuè' goèr, tá rkoèñnïì beèe magoèr li wánïî.	Because iniquity will be multiplied, the love of many will grow cold.
Wowèe a be fʉ vʉ̀ àyàŋsè.	They will come tomorrow.
Wɛ̀ koni mbàa à laʼ mɛ̀.	If youʼve got money, then pay me.
Mmbañruè a baa ca a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Beâe aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, weèe aè táá a ce keè' ba ká mbe buèu? Jisoès ce Nyúè aè loèr ye a du aègho mbe buèu na, e be keè kúti aè njáèá njïì weèe aè yá ye e ce duè na.”	"who also said, ""You men of Galilee, why do you stand looking into the sky? This Jesus, who was received up from you into the sky will come back in the same way as you saw him going into the sky."""
Kúr beèe anaè a beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Hábá, ñwáè ce e ce roèo aè ryú wáè a nda? Yú' nyúèrkaè' yi yu njep wáè.”	"The multitude answered, ""You have a demon! Who seeks to kill you?"""
E ka' naèti embe dïì' ce e ba ce geèe rloo naè kúti, a yá ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ce buumi. E laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Baná aède' weèe aè ke' ba cu mbekïì tá seèe ce keè'ni aèmboè awaè moè'sir ka' a?	"He came to the disciples, and found them sleeping, and said to Peter, ""What, couldn't you watch with me for one hour?"
Jisos Kraâis aè m tuu máè ená m du baptir beèe ka', e m tuu máè ba ená m du fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ. Máè m ce feè'shi nsuñ ca ba neè bfee wa ka'. Máè m geèe wa'a tá ñger efa rkwe ce Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa yi bo buu efa ryáátïì ka'.	For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Good News--not in wisdom of words, so that the cross of Christ wouldn't be made void.
M be maè'shi weèe neè ye tu ka'. M be duè kúti vúè yá weèe.	I will not leave you orphans. I will come to you.
Yi yu ená Jisoès ce e ke geèe beèe a ba brara aè bsii Nyúè, ker ba beèe ce e ke geèe woweèe a ba brara anaè, a ku túr taèr moè'sir. A mbuèu ce rïìtu yi ce koo Jisoès aè rtoo woweèe ená bfúr vi ka'.	For both he who sanctifies and those who are sanctified are all from one, for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa bepsi nshe káè mdip, káè bce ka', caar tá weèr fa mncoèo aè mnsaèpsi beèe ce a ce faè' neè yeèr Nyúè.”	"saying, ""Don't harm the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, until we have sealed the bondservants of our God on their foreheads!"""
Jisoès aè m duè, a ka' baè' aè múè mla' ce mi m ba aègee rla' Sisaèriyaè Fileèpaêi, a bipshi neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Beèe a ce laèa ená Muu Ñwáè yu ba nda?”	"Now when Jesus came into the parts of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, ""Who do men say that I, the Son of Man, am?"""
Bcor aè ñgoâñ Áshaè wááwá vi caè'ni weèe. AÈkwilaè ba Prïûskaè ker ba beèe ce a ke niñ cor mbe waâp ndaèp a caè'ni weèe se aè rlii Tataê.	The assemblies of Asia greet you. Aquila and Priscilla greet you much in the Lord, together with the assembly that is in their house.
Máâ ke yoèñshi yaè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá ce m ce kwaè'shi aèmboè weèe.	I thank my God whenever I remember you,
Beèe anaè a ba rïìñ ená buu ce weèr ce sañ neè weèe aè mñwaè' njo' weèr yu aèfo ka' naè vi yu jáá efa vïì ce weèr be geèe aè nfeè' ce weèr aè vúè a yá weèe naè ka'.	Let such a person consider this, that what we are in word by letters when we are absent, such are we also in deed when we are present.
Yu ba njo' Jisos Kraâis ca ce Nyúè aè m ce weèr ená weèr ba yïì beèe. E ke geèe buu wááwá ba aèmboè e láè ená e be geèe.	in whom also we were assigned an inheritance, having been foreordained according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his will;
Dù nè àmbùu ye.	All of you should go after him.
ntee yi fa yaèñse bu' weèe, káè weèe fa yaèñse tuè'te njobeè' beèe moè' a ce laèa ená noèñ Tata anaè yi yu aètútú ka'. Seemoè' káè aè laèa ñwáè ce e ce suñ beèe buu ce Yú' Rara yi geèe e riñ áè, káè ñwáè ce e ce feè'shi ba blaâa Nyúè áè, káè beèe mo' a ce laèa ená weèr aè sañ ñwaè' áè,	not to be quickly shaken in your mind, nor yet be troubled, either by spirit, or by word, or by letter as from us, saying that the day of Christ had come.
AÈde' beèe a fa' neè ye aèmboè e buu lá buu wa' ka', njobeè' ku ba ba ye ce e ke geèe beèe a cu bteèe ce yoèñse, ker fa woweèe buu wááwá.	neither is he served by men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath, and all things.
Máè koo ñwaè' anaè emba yeâ boè, a ye. Máè ka' ye, yi lee kuè cuèu aèmboè bluè, a bep njep rbúè.	I took the little book out of the angel's hand, and ate it up. It was as sweet as honey in my mouth. When I had eaten it, my stomach was made bitter.
Pitaè aè ruu neè Yú' Rara aè nfeè' anaè, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñgaâa sa' to' ker ba bleebeèe!	"Then Peter, filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, ""You rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,"
AÈmboè woweèe a m ce duè aèmbuèu mmbaè', a ker tuu rdip rbeer ca, cena yi m ba neè woweèe aèmboè njáèá baèptir moè' ce e m geèe woweèe a ba beèe Musïìs.	and were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea;
Pol aè laa enáê, “Káè yu nfeè' yïû múcaèr áè, káè yu yïû njïìsaèp áè, m ce loo neè Nyúè máná wáè ker ba beèe wááwá ce a ce yu' yuu ce m ce laèa ntïìni na, a ba ba aèmboè má máè yu na, ke' ba ñgaâa shañ foñ aèmboè máè ka'.”	"Paul said, ""I pray to God, that whether with little or with much, not only you, but also all that hear me this day, might become such as I am, except for these bonds."""
Mú nfeè' moè' aè ka' tuuse, Jisoès aè yá ñwáè ce e m geèe ye e luñ naè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a laa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, wáè luèñ efa yo yañ. Fa keèr geèe buu bbebep ka', faè dïì' ñgá' moè' goèr lo koni wáè caèa cena ka'.”	"Afterward Jesus found him in the temple, and said to him, ""Behold, you are made well. Sin no more, so that nothing worse happens to you."""
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba bleebeèe, a ku vúshi ye aè njáâá wa' foñ.	Likewise the chief priests also mocking, with the scribes, the Pharisees, and the elders, said,
M be yu' nyor neè njáèá ñwáè ca, ke' ba ba neè yaè nyor ka'. Yuu ce aède' m yu' nyor aègho neè yaè nyor ku ba wa bgoè'sïì caè'caè'.	On behalf of such a one I will boast, but on my own behalf I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.
Yuu yi ka' yááti aèwañ yi kútïì ba ba yuu ce aè rraa. A mbuèu ce a laèa enáê, “Wáè ce aè ce buumi, lá' efa mmirloè, fúú efa rkwe, tá rraa Kraâis li sañ mbe wáâ nduè.”	"Therefore he says, ""Awake, you who sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ will shine on you."""
M be gheèter tatap seê, ka' m ka' kwe, tá weèe bo ku ce kuushi buu ca aè nfeè' wááwá.	Yes, I will make every effort that you may always be able to remember these things even after my departure.
Woweèe a rïìñ seè'ni ená buu wááwá ce m túr, vi loè ba ese wáè.	Now they have known that all things whatever you have given me are from you,
a ce yá boèñboñ ená weèe yu ñwaè' ce aè sañ ba Jisos Kraêis, a ka' tuu weèr aègho. Ñwaè' ca yu ñwaè' ce a sañ ba neè mdip ñwaè' ka'. A sañ ba neè Yú' Nyúâ nteèe. A sañ ba mbe luâr mbáèmbár ka', a sañ ba njep mntee beèe.	being revealed that you are a letter of Christ, served by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tablets of stone, but in tablets that are hearts of flesh.
Yoo zhi ku tɛɛte àbee.	My goats have escaped.
Bbyeèñge a baa a be keè ce goè' baa aèbee, tá a lor moè', ma'shi mo'.	"There will be two grinding grain together. One will be taken, and the other will be left."""
AÈde' ñgoèñ a baa weèe ka'. Woweèe a baèa yi máè njobeè' m ce suñ woweèe ená woweèe a ce geèe buu bbebep.	The world can't hate you, but it hates me, because I testify about it, that its works are evil.
Beèe anaè a ka' yá ncoèo ce Jisoès aè m duèñshi na, a laa enáê, “Neè mini-ñwáè, ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m laèa ená e be keè vúè njep ñgoèñ naè.”	"When therefore the people saw the sign which Jesus did, they said, ""This is truly the prophet who comes into the world."""
Baná ñwáè rbyemïì aè ka' túr byepkúú mbe yeâ ndaèp, e fyá' aè byepkúú anaè. E fa láè ntáèr ca mbenduè cor ka', tá cor bo fyá' aè byepkúú ce a yu byepkúú neè mini-ñwáè.	If any man or woman who believes has widows, let them relieve them, and don't let the assembly be burdened; that it might relieve those who are widows indeed.
Yi yu ba ená btañshïì ce a ce tañshi njep feè' njep feè' anaè, vi geèe beèe a kuushi yaèp buu bbebep,	But in those sacrifices there is a yearly reminder of sins.
Ñwáè ka' laa wa'a, m beesïì mánáê, “Yuu wááwá ce wáè ka' ce geèe, káè aè ce ye ye áè, káè aè ce no no áè, geèe ba aè njáèá njïì ce beèe mo' a ka' yá, tá woweèe a bo kuè'si Nyúè.”	Whether therefore you eat, or drink, or whatever you do, do all to the glory of God.
Woweèe a ka' loèr ku' nfeè', seèesi yuu ce a be geèe, Pitaè aè natïì mbekïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Bfúr waê, weèe rïìñ ená aè m ba efa rkáè', Nyúè aè ce máè tá beèe enje jáá a bo yu' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ eku máâ cuèu, byemi.	"When there had been much discussion, Peter rose up and said to them, ""Brothers, you know that a good while ago God made a choice among you, that by my mouth the nations should hear the word of the Good News, and believe."
“Tá buu bo ba yáánïì neè wáè, tá aè cu aè ñgoèñ ca njïìsaèp.”	that it may be well with you, and you may live long on the earth.
Máè byemi neè Nyúè, a ce keè' aèmboè woweèe foñ a byemi a ce keè' ená beâe bboèñboñ ba beâe bbebep a be keè fúú efa rkwe naè.	having hope toward God, which these also themselves look for, that there will be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.
Ñwáè wááwá fa aèmboè e kwaè'shi enjep yeâ ntee aè rfa. E fa, e fa ce de'ñger káè fa njobeè' a taèa ye taèa ka' njobeè' Nyúè koèñ ñwáè ce e ce fa neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	Let each man give according as he has determined in his heart; not grudgingly, or under compulsion; for God loves a cheerful giver.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Yuu ce aède' weèe gee yi yu ená weèe byemi neè ñwáè ce e tuu máè.”	"Jesus answered them, ""This is the work of God, that you believe in him whom he has sent."""
E laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñkoosimnse ce e yu njep máâ ntee yu yïì ce aède' e ku yú máè. Cu neè mbena ce ke'nïî.”	"He said to them, ""My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch."""
Ñwáè Farïìsi moè' aè laèa neè Jisoès ená a ye a du yeñger. Jisoès aè du a niñ mbe ndaèp mbe ñwáè anaè, a cu, tá a ye a bo yeñger.	One of the Pharisees invited him to eat with him. He entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat at the table.
Bkaŋ bwee bvi yû?	Where are your pans?
Bfúr waê, baná seèe yu boo njeñwáè ce e yu ñkwaèa naè ka', seèe yu ba boo njeñwáè ce e yu ñkwaèa ka' naè.	So then, brothers, we are not children of a handmaid, but of the free woman.
A sañ mbe ñwaè' mncir ce Nyúè aè m fa neè Musïìs enáê, “Fa kur cuèu naè' ce e ce bu' msañ ka'.” Nyúè aè m ce laèa buu ca a ke' ce laèa ba aèmboè naè' ka'.	"For it is written in the law of Moses, ""You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain."" Is it for the oxen that God cares,"
AÈ ka' ba aè nyúè taar anaè, Jisoès aè waa enáê, “ÁÈloêi, ÁÈloêi, Lama Saèbaètanïì”, ce e yu enáê, “Yaè Nyúè, yaè Nyúè, wáè leèse máè njoká?”	"At the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, ""Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?"" which is, being interpreted, ""My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"""
M ce yoèñshi Nyúè ená e geèe Taitoès aè koñ aè rjaè' weèe aèmboè wer weèr foñ aè koèñ aè rjaè' naè.	But thanks be to God, who puts the same earnest care for you into the heart of Titus.
Tee mrùʼ anà fa mɛ̀ bɛr.	Reduce that wine and give me the remaining.
Woweèe a m bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ce laèa ená AÈlajaè be vúè entombïì njoká?”	"They asked him, saying, ""Why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?"""
AÈmboè e m ce kúti anaè, yi m ba ená e be kuè duè ba njïû aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè.	He needed to pass through Samaria.
Yi yu ba ená máè koni yuu ce máè ce roèo aè rkonïì naè ka', a ke' ba ená máè buu faèa dúèdúè ka'. M ku bii gheèter ce duè kuèntombïì máná m bo koni yuu anaè, ce yu yuu ce Jisos Kraâis aè koo máè mba yeâ boè aètu mo.	Not that I have already obtained, or am already made perfect; but I press on, if it is so that I may take hold of that for which also I was taken hold of by Christ Jesus.
M be keè geèe buu bghagha' mbe buèu, duèñshi mncoèo njep ñgoèñ na. Bláá vi be keè ba, tá mor yi ba, tá ku' njemor yi dú'.	I will show wonders in the sky above, and signs on the earth beneath; blood, and fire, and billows of smoke.
Vi m túr mñkuèñ aèmboè mñkuèñ nyobsaa wa'a. Vi m tashi beèe neè mñkuèñ anaè, a fa woweèe ñgá' aègho aè mñwáá taê.	They have tails like those of scorpions, and stings. In their tails they have power to harm men for five months.
E kupse mntaʼ embe zhǐi ndàp.	He has replaced the chairs of his house.
Buu ca vi m koni ba aè rla' Bátanïì ce li yu neèñguu rdip Jodaèn. A faèdïì' Joân aè m ce baèptir beèe.	These things were done in Bethany beyond the Jordan, where John was baptizing.
Zhìi ndap tɛɛ seryɛɛ na.	His house is across there.
AÈde' ñwáè konïì ba njáèá sá' ká ce e ka' túr buu enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá, bá li ryoèñ?	For what does it profit a man, to gain the whole world, and forfeit his life?
a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèfo.	There they preached the Good News.
Wɛ̌ ghor àgho gòr.	You have insisted with it too much.
Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap aè nfeè' ce rmoèoshïì li vúè neè ye, baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè rboâñtu. Rmoèoshïì li ka' vú neè ye, e so, baná Nyúè be fa ye ryoèñ ce yu blaè' ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè beèe wááwá ce a koèñ ye.	Blessed is the man who endures temptation, for when he has been approved, he will receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to those who love him.
Loèr neè nfeè' efa rkoèñ mbaèa. Maè'shi tá buu ce wáè túr naè vi ghááte wáè, njobeè' Nyúè aè laèa ená aède' e ma'shïì wáè aè nfeè' moè' ka'. E be jaè' wáè aè nfeè' wááwá.	"Be free from the love of money, content with such things as you have, for he has said, ""I will in no way leave you, neither will I in any way forsake you."""
Ka' e m ba ñwáâ nrara a ba ñwáâ nyáánïì wa'a, weèe aè m máñni ye, a laa neè Pailáèt ená e fúr ba ñwáâ nyúshi beèe embe shañ, fa neè weèe.	But you denied the Holy and Righteous One, and asked for a murderer to be granted to you,
Muu ca yu mbòŋ.	This child is beautiful.
Nfò e ke yàp njàp sê.	Nfor usually eats soup very irrationally.
Woweèe a m ce roèo Jisoès, a ká' a ce bipshi fa waâp mú mbe Ndaèp Nyúè enáê, “Weèe ce kwaè'shi ená ká? E be vúè ñkaè' ca káè e be vúè ka'?”	"Then they sought for Jesus and spoke one with another, as they stood in the temple, ""What do you think--that he isn't coming to the feast at all?"""
Bzhɛ̀ɛ à sòŋ yaa mbàa.	Thieves stole my money mysteriously.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè buu Nyúè ce Jus a byemi aègho, máè m faè' neè ya ntee wááwá aè rfa ñgá' neè ñgaâa coêr. Baná aèmboè mncir Jus anaè vi yu, máè m bú' mo' ka'.	concerning zeal, persecuting the assembly; concerning the righteousness which is in the law, found blameless.
Yi yu neè rïìtu-ñwáè aè rlaèa aèmboè buu ce woweèe a ce geèe aè bsúèti.	For the things which are done by them in secret, it is a shame even to speak of.
Rlee ñwáè li yu aèmboè mor, a ba aèmboè ñgoèñ ce yi ruu neè buu bbebep, a ce bepsi ñwáè dúèdúè. AÈde' li ku too ñwáè, ñgaèñ yá mluè caa kwe. Mor Sataèn a yuu ce e ke cúè' mor ca.	And the tongue is a fire. The world of iniquity among our members is the tongue, which defiles the whole body, and sets on fire the course of nature, and is set on fire by Gehenna.
Jisoès aè ka' ku fúú embe keñ, beèe a yá ye, a rïîñ.	When they had come out of the boat, immediately the people recognized him,
Yi yu foñ ená viseèe bta a m ce fa ñgá' neè seèe njo' faèa ce seèe aè geèe, seèe yu'nïì neè woweèe. Baná yi yu boèñboñ ená seèe yu'ni neè yiseèe ta ce e yu mbe buèu boèñboñ seê, tá seèe bo koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	Furthermore, we had the fathers of our flesh to chasten us, and we paid them respect. Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?
E lor kúè a gee ñgwaèa aègho, a juu beèe anaè aègho, a ker juu yap njeèe ba yap naè' embe Ndaèp Nyúè. E m buète btábuèr ese beèe ce a m ce kupse mbaèa naè, a da'si yap mbaèa anaè aè nsheè.	He made a whip of cords, and threw all out of the temple, both the sheep and the oxen; and he poured out the changers' money, and overthrew their tables.
Nahoèr aè ba muu Sáruèk, Sáruèk aè ba muu Rugaè, Rugaè aè ba muu Páláèk, Páláèk aè ba muu Ábáèr, Ábáèèr aè ba muu Shálaè,	the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Eber, the son of Shelah,
M rïìñ máná Hároèd ye ye aè yá ená e geèe yuu bebep ka'. A mbuèu ce e kúsi ye neè seèe. Yi yu rara ená e geèe yuu mo' ce aède' a yú ye aètu mo ka'.	Neither has Herod, for I sent you to him, and see, nothing worthy of death has been done by him.
tá ñwáè moè' bo rïìñ yuu ce weèe aè fa ka'. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, baná yeè Ta ce e ke yá buu ce beèe a geèe aè bsúèti, be laè' weèe.	so that your merciful deeds may be in secret, then your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
Nkòni efagho zhi yu ba fɛ?	Take that basket and give me.
Máè yá byú' bbebep vïû btaar, vi feeseè bja'. Vi m fúú ekuè cuèu nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè, ba nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè, ker ba ekuè cuèu ñwáè ce e mú ce nya' mnde' ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè naè.	I saw coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits, something like frogs;
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e túr njáèá ntee ce aède' yi gee ye e gee yuu bebep, e riñ foñ yuu yáánïì ce aède' e gee neè beèe ce a ku ba aènji, a ce daè'.	The high priest can deal gently with those who are ignorant and going astray, because he himself is also surrounded with weakness.
AÈde' seèe laa seeká aèmboè Abraèham ce e yu tar neè seèe ce seèe yu Juês?	What then will we say that Abraham, our forefather, has found according to the flesh?
Jisoès aè naa nyor mbekïì a laa enáê, “Njeñwáè, woweèe a yuê? Ñwáè moè' aè geèe yuu neè wáè ka' a?”	"Jesus, standing up, saw her and said, ""Woman, where are your accusers? Did no one condemn you?"""
Viseèe mnyor ce vi ke kwe búte na, vi be keè kuè kúti ba a njáèá mnyor ce vi ke kwe ka', búte ka'.	For this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put on immortality.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' Sisaèriyaè ce li rlii li m ba ená Koèniyuès. E m ba tu neè kúr bsoogáè ce a m ba rjeèe. A m ce too kúr bsoogáè anaè ená bsoogáè enje Italeè.	Now there was a certain man in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of what was called the Italian Regiment,
E tòo kòʼ mbà rleemor.	He has roasted coco yam right inside the fire.
Buu ce vi túr myoèñ vi túr nyor njáèá moè'sir ka'. Nyor ñwáè yu jáá efa yïì nyaèa, nyor siñ aè ba jáá efa yïì nca.	All flesh is not the same flesh, but there is one flesh of men, another flesh of animals, another of fish, and another of birds.
Baná weèe kansuèr weèe aè ba cep ntuu neè tu yïû goèr ená e vú neè Pol fa neè weèe, aèmboè weèe ce lá koèñ aè rfyá' njep múè vi mnsa' boèñboñ wa'a. Weèr aè tami nyor aè ryú ye tá e ka' vúè baè'.”	"Now therefore, you with the council inform the commanding officer that he should bring him down to you tomorrow, as though you were going to judge his case more exactly. We are ready to kill him before he comes near."""
Beèe ce a m duè a Pol weèe naè, a m duè caar a du a ma'shi ye aè rla' Atáèns. A ka' ce kúti, Pol aè laa neè woweèe ená a du laa neè Timotïì ba Silaès ená a vú cárcár vú yá ye.	But those who escorted Paul brought him as far as Athens. Receiving a commandment to Silas and Timothy that they should come to him very quickly, they departed.
Kuushi neè foñ ená bcïìndap Nyúè ce a m kani efa rcu mbe dïì' ce Nyúè aè m fa woweèe, a ma'shi yap dïì' anaè naè, Nyúè aè ma' woweèe njep dïì' ce ku ba ba túè'nji tá woweèe a ku noèñ njo neè bshañ kuè mkoo caar duè baè' aè noâñ goèr ce Nyúè be sa' ñgoèñ naè.	Angels who didn't keep their first domain, but deserted their own dwelling place, he has kept in everlasting bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day.
A be toʼsi bʉbʉ ntìni.	They will announce the chiefʼs death today.
Judaès aè natïì a duê, a yá beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe ce a m ba btu neè beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè, a seesi a woweèe aèmboè aède' e gee ka' fyeni Jisoès neè woweèe.	He went away, and talked with the chief priests and captains about how he might deliver him to them.
Jus ce aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m tuu beèe moè' efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe Lávïì ená a du yá Joân, bipshi neè ye enáê, “A wáè nda?”	"This is John's testimony, when the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem to ask him, ""Who are you?"""
Weèe aè be riñ ñwáè moè' efa múè ñgaâa rsa', káè beèe Farïìsi áè, ce e byemi neè ye a?	Have any of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?
Ka' yi yu wa'a, ñwáè moè' aè ka' suñ wáè ená byee ce aè ce ye anaè yu byee ce a tañshi tañshïì aègho, aè fa ye ka'. Fa ye ka' njobeè' ñwáè anaè ka' yá aèmboè aè ce ye, e kwa'shïì yi ená wáè geèe ba yuu bebep.	"But if anyone says to you, ""This was offered to idols,"" don't eat it for the sake of the one who told you, and for the sake of conscience. For ""the earth is the Lord's, and all its fullness."""
Muu nsuènsuè ca aè ka' yu' wa'a, a sá seê, a nati a du njobeè' e m túr ku' buu seê.	But when the young man heard the saying, he went away sad, for he was one who had great possessions.
Woweèe a m koo Jisoès, a du aègho mbe ndaèp ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. Pitaè aè m ce duè a waâp mbuèu, a ba yi encaèñ.	They seized him, and led him away, and brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed from a distance.
Tata Jisoès aè ka' laèa neè woweèe wa'a, Nyúè aè lor ye a du aègho mbe buèu. E ka' baè' mbo a cu aè bo maè' Nyúè.	So then the Lord, after he had spoken to them, was received up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God.
Woowèe a ba nyɛɛ njep nduunjì à fèʼ ce wèr à ba sɛ̂.	They suddenly appeared on the road by the time we were tired.
AÈmboè yi yu seè'ni na, aède' a ku koo seèe aètu ñgá' ce e koni ntïìni na. Yi ka' koni wa'a, seèe túr yuu aè rlaèa ka'.”	"For indeed we are in danger of being accused concerning this day's riot, there being no cause. Concerning it, we wouldn't be able to give an account of this commotion."""
Yuu ce ñwáè aè bi, yu yïû ñwáè. Yuu ce yú' yi bi, aè ba yïû yú'.	That which is born of the flesh is flesh. That which is born of the Spirit is spirit.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Tata Nyúè aè m laèa enáê, ‘M be tuusi beèe ce a ce laèa li moè' jáá, tá a du suñ wa blaèa neè yaè beèe. Ka' m be geèe wa'a, yaè beèe ca a be yu' yuu ce máè laèa neè woweèe ka'.’ ”	"In the law it is written, ""By men of strange languages and by the lips of strangers I will speak to this people. Not even thus will they hear me, says the Lord."""
Weèe yu aè múè boo blee vïû Nyúè, ce Nyúè aè m sañ map mlii mbe ñwaè' embe buèu naè. Weèe táá ba aè bsii Nyúè ce e ke sa' beèe wááwá. Me myoèñ mi yu aè múè myoèñ beâe mini ce a geèe woweèe a ba yáánïì naè.	to the general assembly and assembly of the firstborn who are enrolled in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made perfect,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Maè'shi tá a nyañ boo entoèmbïì njobeè' yi boèñ ená a lor byee boo ma' neè ñgwe ka'.”	"But Jesus said to her, ""Let the children be filled first, for it is not appropriate to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs."""
Ryá'nïì mini ca yu ryá'nïì ce li ghááte a ke' ba jáá efa Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce Nyúè aè fa mba máâ mmboè ka'. Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ce geèe beèe a ce rïìñ foèo Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè bghoèo.	according to the Good News of the glory of the blessed God, which was committed to my trust.
Ma rla' rgoèr caè li tenïì nyor bdïû' btaar, mla' ce mi m ba aè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na mi gweñgeèr. Nyúè aè m kuushi ma rla' rgoèr ce a m ce too ená Babiloèn naè, li rshentee ba yïì ñgá' aè vú mbenduè rla' ca. Nyúè aè m geèe rla' ca li no li rshentee ce li m ba njep yeâ ndoñ aèmboè ndoñ mruâ' mtatap wa'a.	The great city was divided into three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. Babylon the great was remembered in the sight of God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the fierceness of his wrath.
Ŋgǎa lɛ̀pshi ŋkòʼ a ke tòʼ bcɛ̀ʼ.	Those who beckon the big mask juju usually tie a piece of cloth around their waist.
Ca yi m gha' woweèe seê, woweèe a bááñgeèr, a laa enáê, “To beèe ce a laèa na yu beâe Galeèleê!	"They were all amazed and marveled, saying to one another, ""Behold, aren't all these who speak Galileans?"
Nfeè' aè ka' tuuse aèmboè awaè moè'sir wa'a, ñwáè moè' aè ker laa tatap enáê, “Neè mini-ñwáè, ñwáè ca aè m ba a ye. E yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.”	"After about one hour passed, another confidently affirmed, saying, ""Truly this man also was with him, for he is a Galilean!"""
Felep aè ka' loè a ku yá ená e yu aè rla' AÈsotoès, a ka' ce caèa, a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aè mla' wááwá caar a du a ba' Sisaèriyaè.	But Philip was found at Azotus. Passing through, he preached the Good News to all the cities, until he came to Caesarea.
À be dù làa nè yoo cùu.	You will go and say it yourself.
AÈ m ba neètú' ce túè' be raa tá Hároèd fúr ye embe shañ sa' naè, Pitaè aè noñ mbetar bsoogáè a baa, a cúú ye neè bkwaâñ bbaa aè mkoo. Bsoogáè ce a m ce keè'ni shañ a m táá aè cuâu ñka' shañ.	The same night when Herod was about to bring him out, Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains. Guards in front of the door kept the prison.
Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap, caa rmoèoshïì baná m be fa ñgaèñ bcáâ' bbúú aè nyor, keè' siñsi li rlii embe ñwaè' ryoèñ ka'. M be táá kuèntombïì neè yaè Ta ba vi bcïìndap, laèa aèwañ máná ñwáè anaè yu yaè.	He who overcomes will be arrayed in white garments, and I will in no way blot his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name before my Father, and before his angels.
Mɛ̀ barni wɛ̀ à ntaŋ ce wɛ̀ fa anà.	I have supported you for the suggestion youʼve given.
Saimúèn aè ka' yá ená ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a láè mmbo mbenduè beèe, woweèe a konïì Yú' Rara, e vú neè mbaèa ená e bo fa neè woweèe,	Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he offered them money,
Weèe aè ka' tá foèosi beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep neè weèe ka', yeè Ta embe buèu foosïì weèe yeè buu bbebep ce weèe aè geèe foñ ka'.	But if you don't forgive men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a m loè embe rtuèu Oleèf a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. AÈ rloè embe rtuèu Oleèf duè Jáèrusaláèm e ku ba aèmboè mar moè'sir.	Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem, a Sabbath day's journey away.
AÈmboè weèe aè rïìñ ená buu wááwá vi be keè bú na, baná njáèá ñgeèe ce weèe aè ba ce geèe yu njáèá yïû ká? Weèe aè ba fa weêe mnyor neè Nyúè, geèe ba ñgeèe ce Nyúè koèñ.	Therefore since all these things will be destroyed like this, what kind of people ought you to be in holy living and godliness,
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' e seè'ni ce yu ba mnoèñ elúèsimbuèu, Nyúè aè laa neè seèe njïì enjep muu yïì. Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ ca wááwá ba njïì enjep muu yïì anaè. Nyúè aè m ce ye tá e bo fa buu wááwá mba yeâ mmboè.	has at the end of these days spoken to us by his Son, whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the worlds.
A m cáp ye, e ke' kúsïì ka'. A m fa ye ñgá', e ke' gee yuu mo' ka'. E m ku lá buu anaè ba mbe mmbo Nyúè ce e ke sa' mnsa' yáánïì.	Who, when he was cursed, didn't curse back. When he suffered, didn't threaten, but committed himself to him who judges righteously;
E m laèa enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' neè ñgeèe ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir. Woweèe a ke koèñ aè ryar mñgaèbúlaè ce kar aègho, koñ ená beèe a ca'ni woweèe aè mntaa. Woweèe a niñ aè mndap mloo, ce ba mnta' beâe bgoèrgoèr, a baè' aè mñkaè', ce ba mnta' bboèñboñ.	"Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces, the best seats in the synagogues, and the best places at feasts;
Luke	Luêk	20	47	Woweèe a ke bo' byepkúú, ye yaèp buu wááwá, ce geèe mloo msaèsap aè rduèñshi neè beèe ená woweèe a rïìñ aè rloo seê. Yaèp ñgá' be keè ba goèr seê.”	who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers: these will receive greater condemnation."
Weèr aè duèñshi ená weèr yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Nyúè aè yer ñgeâe rara, ba aè buu Nyúè ce weèr aè rïìñ, ba aè njáèá njïì ce weèr ce kur ntee, ker ba foñ aè njáèá njïì ce weèr ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe. Weèr aè ruusi ba neè Yú' Rara, a koñ beèe neè mini-ñwáè.	in pureness, in knowledge, in patience, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in sincere love,
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' e seè'ni Nyúè aè gee weèe woweèe aè kútïì bkar njo' rkwe ce muu yïì ce e m ba ñwáè aè m kwe a seâe tuè naè. Nyúè aè m geèe wa'a, tá e bo tár weèe a yeâ bsii aèmboè yïì beèe ce a yu brara, a túr faèa ka'.	yet now he has reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and without blemish and blameless before him,
Yi yu mini ená weèr ce cu njep ñgoèñ na. Weèr ce cu njo wa'a, a ke' ce maè' bïìr ba aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ke maè' naè ka'.	For though we walk in the flesh, we don't wage war according to the flesh;
E mʉ lip ye, a tosi zhì nfur.	He beat him and increased the pain of his injury.
M táá mbetar. M ce koèñ máná máè ba maè'shi tunshe duè cu weèr Jisos Kraêis. Yïì anaè yi boèñ a caa rcu embe tunshe na.	But I am in a dilemma between the two, having the desire to depart and be with Christ, which is far better.
A nda e tɛɛ mbenjì ce nà?	Who is standing behind the tree?
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba fa waâp mú ce a m ce too ená Josáèf. Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a m ce too ye ená Baènabaès. Mbuèu efa rlii ca yu ená, ñwáè nfa ñger. E m ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Lávïì, a ba ñwáè ce a m bi ba aè to' Saiproès.	Joses, who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas (which is, being interpreted, Son of Encouragement), a Levite, a man of Cyprus by race,
Timotïì, ke'ni buu ce Nyúè aè fa mba wáâ mmboè na boèñboñ. Fa fa yo cuèu njep múè bde' bcicïì ba mnsár ce beèe a ce kwaè'shi ená yu bfee naè ka'.	Timothy, guard that which is committed to you, turning away from the empty chatter and oppositions of the knowledge which is falsely so called;
Ñwáè moè' aè ke' ba mbe buèu, káè njep ñgoèñ na, káè mbaè yir ce e m ghááte aè rbúèr ñwaè' anaè, fyá' mbo ka'.	No one in heaven above, or on the earth, or under the earth, was able to open the book, or to look in it.
Weèe aè m yu' aèmboè máè m suñ weèe máná m ce duè kúti yá weèe. Weèe aè ba koñ máè, weèe aè ba lu'shi ená m ce duè aè ryá Taèr, njobeè' e kuè' a caa máè.	You heard how I told you, 'I go away, and I come to you.' If you loved me, you would have rejoiced, because I said 'I am going to my Father;' for the Father is greater than I.
Pitaè aè ka' ce señ ená rlo ce e yá naè li ce laèa ba ená ká lá, beèe ce Koèniyuès aè m tuu naè a banïì vú a roo ndap yïì Saimúèn a yá, a táá njep cuèu ñka' ce a m sïìr ndap anaè aègho,	Now while Peter was very perplexed in himself what the vision which he had seen might mean, behold, the men who were sent by Cornelius, having made inquiry for Simon's house, stood before the gate,
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pitaè ce m yu ñwáè ntuu Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ neè beèe Nyúè ce a da'se a ba bkïìloè aè ñgoâñ Pontuès, ba Gaèláshaè, ba Kaèpaèdosïìyaè, ba Áshaè ker ba Bïìtinïìyaè.	Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen ones who are living as foreigners in the Dispersion in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
Lu'shi neè aè nfeè' wááwá,	Rejoice always.
A m laèa neè mñguu ca ená vi fa joèo yuu ce yi fúú enjep nsheè a ce kuè' ka'. A m maè'shi ená vi fa ñgá' ba neè beèe ce a m buu ncoèo Nyúè nje nsaèpsi.	They were told that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, neither any green thing, neither any tree, but only those people who don't have God's seal on their foreheads.
Jisoès aè m naètïû aè dïì' ce rla' Tayaè li m ba naè, a to'ni rla' Sidoèn, a caa Mla' ce Rúêú, a du a ba' aè rdip rgoèr ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	Again he departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, and came to the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the region of Decapolis.
Weèe fa maè'shi tá ye ntee yi ce fa weèe ñgá' aè rye nyaèa ce weèe a yuu efa ntaa ka'. Weèe fa kwaè'shi ená weèe ka' gee wa'a ba yuu bebep ka'.	Whatever is sold in the butcher shop, eat, asking no question for the sake of conscience,
Buu ca vi koni wa'a, tá yi bo kuè ghááte aèmboè a m sañ mbe yap ñwaè' mncir enáê, ‘A m baèa máè aè cicïì.’	But this happened so that the word may be fulfilled which was written in their law, 'They hated me without a cause.'
Yi ku ba wa'a neè yeè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu. E ce koèñ ená moè' efa boo bká' ca bú ka'.	Even so it is not the will of your Father who is in heaven that one of these little ones should perish.
E gwè jàmishòn njobèʼ e m ce dù ŋwàʼ kaʼ.	He failed the exams because was not going to school.
Nfeè' aè m káè' a ce gháá ce beèe Jus a ke ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap. Jisoès aè du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá e bo ye ñkaè' anaè foñ.	The Passover of the Jews was at hand, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
M be beèesi buu ce weèe aè m sañ a bipshi neè máè naè. Ñwáè aè ka' tá loèr ñgwa ka' yi ku ba yáánïì.	Now concerning the things about which you wrote to me: it is good for a man not to touch a woman.
Mɛ̀ ba deʼ ye e war.	I shouted at her and she cried.
Hároèd aè ka' yá Jisoès, a yu' rboèñ seê, njobeè' e m ce koèñ aè ryá ye ká' ese aè nfeè' njïìsaèp. E m yu' buu ce Jisoès aè m ce geèe, a ce koèñ aè ryá yuu ghagha' mo' ce e be geèe.	Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he had wanted to see him for a long time, because he had heard many things about him. He hoped to see some miracle done by him.
Njeŋwɛ̀ fa vʉ̀ mbena kaʼ njobèʼ ncɛ̀p à bàʼri mbo.	A woman should not come here because a juju has settled on this spot.
Bkar waê, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ce weèe yu bkïìloè a ker ba beèe ce a ce caèa njep ñgoèñ na caèa, ená weèe borni buu ce wee bláá vi luèute aè rgeèe, aè ba buu ce vi ke jepsi wee mntee ce weèe aè láè neè Nyúè.	Beloved, I beg you as foreigners and pilgrims, to abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the soul;
Wèe ce ghani ba mbàp a?	Are you hunting rats?
Yǎanà a nkapni.	That is a mystery.
Mɛ̀ dù a yɛ ye nèŋgòŋ.	I went and saw him actually.
Beâe aè rla' anaè a m fúú nto'nïì baa, beèe mo' a du aè ñgúè' yïì Juês, beèe mo' a du aè ñgúè' yïì ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès.	But the multitude of the city was divided. Part sided with the Jews, and part with the apostles.
E be siñsi map mñgoommir wááwá. Rkwe li be keèr ba aègho ka', ñkoosimnse ba aègho ka', rwar li ba aègho ka', ryañ li ba aègho ka', njobeè' buu brúèú aè mïì dúèdúè.”	"He will wipe away from them every tear from their eyes. Death will be no more; neither will there be mourning, nor crying, nor pain, any more. The first things have passed away."""
Bïìr ce weèe ce maè' weèe buu bbebep naè aè be ba' mbe dïì' ce weèe ma' wa'a kweñger ka'.	You have not yet resisted to blood, striving against sin;
AÈde' ñwáè konïì ba njáèá sá' ká, ce e ka' túr buu enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá, lo bá li ryoèñ? Yuu ce aède' ñwáè fa aètu li ryoèñ a ká?	For what will it profit a man, if he gains the whole world, and forfeits his life? Or what will a man give in exchange for his life?
AÈ yu nda, ka' sa' ñwáè rfaè' ñwáè moè'? Ñwáè ce aède' e laa ená ñwáè rfaè' aè geèe boèñboñ káè bebep áè, ku ba yïì masaè. E be gweè ka' njobeè' Tata túr ñger aè rgeèe ye tá e táá tatap.	Who are you who judge another's servant? To his own lord he stands or falls. Yes, he will be made to stand, for God has power to make him stand.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá nyaâa mbembep moè' aèmboè e ce fúú enjep roè. Nyaèa anaè aè m túr btu saèambaê, a túr mdoñ rúêú. E m túr mtaa kúú mbe mdoñ anaè wááwá. A m sañ mlii mbe btu anaè a ce cáp ba Nyúè aègho.	Then I stood on the sand of the sea. I saw a beast coming up out of the sea, having ten horns and seven heads. On his horns were ten crowns, and on his heads, blasphemous names.
Tata aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Maataè, Maataè, mluè mi ce koo wáè aè buu magoèr,	"Jesus answered her, ""Martha, Martha, you are anxious and troubled about many things,"
Yàa taa à cɛ̀psi mbì fàdìʼ bèe a bo kèr zhɛ̀ɛ kaʼ.	His father has put medicine on the kola nut so that people would not steal again.
M ce suñ aèmboè ya tu, ñwáè ce e ce suñ aèmboè máè foñ yu yaè Ta ce e m tuu máè.”	"I am one who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me."""
Ŋgɛʼ à ba deʼ enɛ e zhɛɛ yuu, mɛ̀ cop ye.	Ngeh wanted to steal something, and I saw him.
Nyúè aè ka' coo, Jisoès weèe a fúú aè múè rla' anaè.	When evening came, he went out of the city.
Geèe neè buu wááwá neè rkoèñnïì-ñwáè.	Let all that you do be done in love.
Seèe ka' tá ba mini neè ye ka', aède' e kupse efa rba njáèá ñwáè ce e yu na ka'. E be kuè ba yi yu mini aè nfeè' wááwá.”	"If we are faithless, he remains faithful. He can't deny himself."""
Ñwáè aè ka' ce roèo aè rgeèe yuu bebep neè woweèe, baná mor yi be fúú eku waâp cuèu, toèo ñgaèñ. Baná ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' ce roèo aè rgeèe yuu bebep neè woweèe, baná ñgaèñ be kuè kwe.	If anyone desires to harm them, fire proceeds out of their mouth and devours their enemies. If anyone desires to harm them, he must be killed in this way.
Weèr aè m naèti yer a du entoèmbïì, a du a niñ mbe keñ ñgoèr a du aè rla' Asoès. Yi m ba ená weèr be baè' aèfo koo Pol mbe keñ. Pol aè m seèesi a woweèe wa'a njobeè' e m koèñ aè rduè aèfo neè mkuèu.	But we who went ahead to the ship set sail for Assos, intending to take Paul aboard there, for he had so arranged, intending himself to go by land.
Beèe wááwá a beesïì a laa enáê, “Maè'shi tá vi bláá vi ba mbe weâr tuè keèr ba mbe tu boo wer.”	"All the people answered, ""May his blood be on us, and on our children!"""
njobeè' muu waè ca aè m kwe a ker kúti nteèe, e m bú, a ker yááti.’ Woweèe a ka' geèe wa' wáá, a ká' a ce ye ñkaè'.	for this, my son, was dead, and is alive again. He was lost, and is found.' They began to celebrate.
Cuâu ñka' yïû yi'seè ba nduunjïì yïû yi'seè yi ce duè ba aè dïì' rcu ce nfeseè, beèe ce a ce yá yi, a ba múcaèr.	How narrow is the gate, and restricted is the way that leads to life! Few are those who find it.
Nfò à nòŋsi zhii ŋwàʼ mbendùu kìdàŋ.	Nfor has left his book on the bench.
Jisoès aè m fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè anaè a du a cu aèwaâa roè.	On that day Jesus went out of the house, and sat by the seaside.
Beèe ce a ka' ke fúú efa rkwe entombïì baná woweèe a yu ñgaâa mboâñtu a ba beâe brara. Rkwe embenjïì li be joèo woweèe ka'. Woweèe a be ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè ba Kraêis, sa' a Kraâis weèe aè bfeè' ncúèkïì.	Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. Over these, the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God and of Christ, and will reign with him one thousand years.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba a weâe mú ce e túr bfee, a yi buu, baná li rcu rboèñboñ li be kuè ce duèñshi ená e túr bfee. E ka' ce cu wa'a, e ba múfáèá aè yi ñgeèe aèmboè ñwáè bfee aè ba ba.	Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show by his good conduct that his deeds are done in gentleness of wisdom.
À ba koni kɛ ye?	What happened to him?
E la' mi mmbo mbe waâp nduè, a loo, a nati a duê.	He laid his hands on them, and departed from there.
Kuushi beèe ce a yu mbe shañ, koosimnse neè woweèe aèmboè wá wáè yu lá mbe shañ wa' foñ. Kwaè'shi aèmboè beèe ce a ce yá ñgá', njobeè' aè ku túr nyor foñ aèmboè woweèe.	Remember those who are in bonds, as bound with them; and those who are ill-treated, since you are also in the body.
Máâ tuu ye ená e vú yá weèe tá e bo suñ weèe aèmboè weèr yu, keèr fa weèe ñger foñ.	I am sending him to you for this very purpose, that he may know your circumstances and comfort your hearts,
Seèe rïìñ ená Nyúè aè fa mncir ca ba njo' beâe bboèñboñ ka'. E fa vi njo' beèe ce a teèe btu, a ce bú' mncir, ker ba beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka', a ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep. E fa vi foñ njo' beèe ce yap ñgeèe yi yu rara ka', woweèe a ce jaèasi buu Nyúè. E fa vi njo' beèe ce a ce yúshi wap bta ba wap mmaê, ker ba beèe mo' foñ ce a yu ñgaâa nyúshi beèe.	as knowing this, that law is not made for a righteous man, but for the lawless and insubordinate, for the ungodly and sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,
Jisoès aè laa yi yu neè ye enáê, “Kúsi saè' mbaè ruèu njobeè' ñwáè ce e co' saè', be keèe kuè kwe aè saè'.	"Then Jesus said to him, ""Put your sword back into its place, for all those who take the sword will die by the sword."
Seèe be keè kupse nfeè' moè'sir. Tá ñwáè ka' keè búèr rlir seèe aè kupse neè wáá. Be ba aè nfeè' elúèsimbuèu tá rsoèñ li laêa, tá buu ca koni. Li be keè laèa, tá beèe ce a m kweñger a fúú efa rkwe neè njáèá nyor ce aètaè e ke kwe ka', tá seèe ce a cu bteèe, kupse.	in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet. For the trumpet will sound, and the dead will be raised incorruptible, and we will be changed.
Tar muu anaè aè ku waa aè cuèu anaè, a laa enáê, “Máè byemi. Geèe tá la rbyemïì li tap.”	"Immediately the father of the child cried out with tears, ""I believe. Help my unbelief!"""
M ce kwaè'shi máná weèe be loè yá ená weèr aè gweè rmoèoshïì ka'.	But I hope that you will know that we aren't disqualified.
Ntee yi yañ beèe mo' ce a m ba mbo, woweèe a ká' a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “A jarsi mgúr ca aè cicïì njoká?	"But there were some who were indignant among themselves, saying, ""Why has this ointment been wasted?"
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Masaè, máè yá máná aè yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	"The woman said to him, ""Sir, I perceive that you are a prophet."
Yá neè ená wee blaèa vi yu bboèñboñ, a ker ce leèe aèmboè mgwañ wa'a. Ñwáè ka' bipshi yuu neè weèe, weèe gheteèr beesi ye aè njïû mboèñmboñ.	Let your speech always be with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may know how you ought to answer each one.
Mkuu mmer mi bùu.	Our beans have been eaten by weevils.
Beèe ce a ke buumi a ke buumi ba neètú', buu mno vi ke gha' koo ñgaâa no buu ba neètú'.	For those who sleep, sleep in the night, and those who are drunk are drunk in the night.
E nòŋ yeeyè.	She is lying face-up.
Mɛ̀ m bii àŋgar a ce dù ntaa nje Nàjeryà nè mkùu.	When I was young, I used to attend market at Nigeria on foot.
Wowèe a lɛ̀ yap mbàa àwaŋ.	They kept their money openly.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' entombïì weèe aè ba aèmboè bgúâú beèe wa'a, njobeè' weèe aè m ce geèe buu bbebep, a ke' túr ncoèo ce yu ba ncoèo beèe Nyúè ka'. Seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè ka' ba aèbee, Nyúè aè foosïì seèe efa yïìseèe buu bbebep wááwá, a gee seèe aè kútïì bteèe seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe.	You were dead through your trespasses and the uncircumcision of your flesh. He made you alive together with him, having forgiven us all our trespasses,
Muu à mʉ ce yaŋ, mamuu à ku ce war nfèʼsìp.	When the child was sick, the mother was crying everyday.
Ñgoèñ yi be cïì'ti seê, tá njeè koo, tá byañ vi gwe aè nduè beèe aè bdïì' jáá jáèá jáá. Buu bwáp, ker ba mncoâo btatap seê, vi be yááti mbe buèu.	There will be great earthquakes, famines, and plagues in various places. There will be terrors and great signs from heaven.
Wěetaŋ a ke bèe cii Mabòlʉ mbà Mbòr.	Tang clan people perform Maboluʼs infertility ritual at Mbot.
M ce laèa ya neè weèe ená, ñwáè fa kúúsi yuu bebep neè yuu bebep ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' lip wáè neè bo aè geè', aè beesïì geè' mo' neè ye foñ tá e lïîp.	But I tell you, don't resist him who is evil; but whoever strikes you on your right cheek, turn to him the other also.
Nyúè aè fa nsuñ ca ce yu nsuñ mboèñmboñ seê, mba wáâ mmboè. Loèr nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' kupse nsuñ anaè ka'. Lor nfeè' ba aè ñger Yú' Rara ce yi yu njep wáâ ntee.	That good thing which was committed to you, guard through the Holy Spirit who dwells in us.
a laa enáê, “Wee weèe foñ aè ba riñ yuu ce aède' yi ba gee cumúnyañ ba aègho ntïìni na, geewa'a, a súèti yi ese weèe.	"saying, ""If you, even you, had known today the things which belong to your peace! But now, they are hidden from your eyes."
Weèe ce roèo ye seè'ni aè ryú máè ce m yu ñwáè ce máè suñ weèe yuu mini ce máè yu' ese Nyúè. Abraèham aè m be gee yuu mo' wa' ka'.	But now you seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth, which I heard from God. Abraham didn't do this.
Pitaè aè laa yi yu enáê, “Tataê, máè ka'. Máè m be ye ya yu yuu ce ncir yi kani ka'.”	"But Peter said, ""Not so, Lord; for I have never eaten anything that is common or unclean."""
Yu' neè boèñboñ. Máâ Poêl, m ce suñ weèe ená weèe ka' byemi ená a gee weèe búè tá weèe ka' ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, baná yuu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe neè weèe naè yi bú aè cicïì.	Behold, I, Paul, tell you that if you receive circumcision, Christ will profit you nothing.
“Baná aède' m be'nïì beèe eluèuni na ba aè ká? Woweèe a yu aèmboè bghaèrbeèe ce a cute aè ntaa a ce ká' bghaèrbeèe mo', a ce laèa enáê,	"But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, who call to their companions
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	17	‘Weèr aè fyáp mndoñ neè weèe, weèe aè bii bii ka', weèr aè fa nceâ rkwe, weèe aè war ka'.’	and say, 'We played the flute for you, and you didn't dance. We mourned for you, and you didn't lament.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	18	M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' Joân aè m vúè a ce ye yuu ka', a ce no yuu ka', beèe a laa enáê, ‘Nyúèrkaè' yu njep ye.’	For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, 'He has a demon.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	11	19	Muu Ñwáè aè vúè yi, a ka' ce ye buu ce no buu, beèe a laa enáê, ‘Ñwáè ca yu ñkuñri, a koo ñkar a ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.’ Yi yu ená bfee vi ce duèñshi nyor aè njáèá njïì ce boo ñgaâa bfee a ce geèe yaèp buu.”	The Son of Man came eating and drinking, and they say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!' But wisdom is justified by her children."
Pol aè waa enáê, “Fa báási yoè nyor ka'! Weèr ku ba taâa wááwá!”	"But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying, ""Don't harm yourself, for we are all here!"""
Wee weèe yu aè múè beèe ce Nyúè aè ce ená a ba beèe Jisos Kraêis.	among whom you are also called to belong to Jesus Christ;
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger yi ba mbe nshe e mbenduè ryáá naè táá aètu ñwáè ce e yu' blaâa Nyúè ku yu' rboèñ aègho seê,	What was sown on the rocky places, this is he who hears the word, and immediately with joy receives it;
M ce yoèñshi Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê, aè ba ye ce e fa máè ñger ená m gee rfaè' ca. M ce yoèñshi ye njobeè' e m yá ená m yu ñwáâ mini, a ka' ce máè ená m fa' neè ye.	And I thank him who enabled me, Christ Jesus our Lord, because he counted me faithful, appointing me to service;
Seèe aè koèñni njobeè' e m koèñ seèe entombïì.	We love him, because he first loved us.
Beèe Farïìsi a fúú njepmbeè a cu mcúè, a seesi aèmboè a be koo Jisoès yú.	But the Pharisees went out, and conspired against him, how they might destroy him.
Bfúr mo' ce weèr woweèe aè m ce cu, a m ba beèe nsaèambaê. Ñwáâ nlee aè loèr ñgwa, a kwe, a bi boo a ye ka', a ma'shi ñgwa neè nfúr yïì.	Now there were with us seven brothers. The first married and died, and having no seed left his wife to his brother.
Máè rïìñ máná weèe aè tami nyor a ce lu'shi aè rjaè' woweèe. A mbuèu ce m ce naèa tu neè weèe aè bsii beèe Nyúâ aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè máná weèe ce beâe aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè aè m tami nyor aè rfa ká' ha' ñgaèani. Ye ntee ce weèe aè túr aè rfa yuu yi geèe beèe magoèr efa waâp mú a koñ aè rfa foñ.	for I know your readiness, of which I boast on your behalf to them of Macedonia, that Achaia has been prepared for a year past. Your zeal has stirred up very many of them.
Waè' m ce laèa buu ca tá beèe a bo koèñ máè, káè yu' rboèñ neè yuu ce m ce laèa a? Yi yu wa' ka'. M ce koèñ máná yu' ba Nyúè yu' rboèñ neè máè. Máè m ba ce koèñ máná yu' ba beèe yu' rboèñ neè máè, máè m ba ba ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraâis ka'.	For am I now seeking the favor of men, or of God? Or am I striving to please men? For if I were still pleasing men, I wouldn't be a servant of Christ.
E du a yá yïì maê, yïì ma aè suñ ye yuu ce e geêe. E vúê, a laa enáê, “Fa tu Joân njep kañ seè'ni na.”	"She, being prompted by her mother, said, ""Give me here on a platter the head of John the Baptizer."""
Jisoès aè ka' yu' blaèa ca, a bááñger seê, a karsi nyor a laa neè kúr beèe ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu naè enáê, “M ce suñ weèe ená máè be yá njáèá ñwáè moè' ce e túr njáèá rbyemïì ca ka', ka' aè to' Isráèl.”	"When Jesus heard these things, he marveled at him, and turned and said to the multitude who followed him, ""I tell you, I have not found such great faith, no, not in Israel."""
Nyúè aè m buu foñ efa rfa ñgá' neè beèe eluâuñgoèñ ce a m ce geèe buu bbebep naè ka'. E m geèe mdip mi ruu a cete ñgoèñ wááwá, a yúshi beèe ce a m teèe tu neè ye anaè. E m ku ja' ba Nowa caè'caè' ce e m ce feè'shi neè beèe ená a ce gee ba buu bboèñboñ, ker ba beèe mo' beèe nsaèambaê.	and didn't spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah with seven others, a preacher of righteousness, when he brought a flood on the world of the ungodly;
Rkaèñsïì anaè li ka' múè' rwee anaè, njemor yi fúú enjo aèmboè nje efa mor foèo wa'a. Njemor anaè yi ka' fúú wa'a, a cete rbuu wááwá, rlir nyúè li ke' ker yááti ka'.	He opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke went up out of the pit, like the smoke from a burning furnace. The sun and the air were darkened because of the smoke from the pit.
Noèñ ce woweèe a m láè yi ka' gháá, Hároèd aè yar bcáâ' kúú a cu mbe kaèbaèraè', a laa neè woweèe.	On an appointed day, Herod dressed himself in royal clothing, sat on the throne, and gave a speech to them.
Weèe yu boo ñgaâa ntuu Nyúè, a ce ye sá' efa yuu ce woweèe aè m suñ beèe ená yi be keè ba naè. Leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye a weâe bta naè, weèe ce ye sá' efa gho seè'ni. Nyúè aè m laèa neè Abraèham enáê, ‘M be ghoèni mnjáèá enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá njïì enjep yoè ñgúè beèe.’	You are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers, saying to Abraham, 'In your seed will all the families of the earth be blessed.'
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñgúè beèe ca be kweñger wáá tá buu ca ka' koni ka'.	Most certainly I tell you, this generation will not pass away until all things are accomplished.
Yi yu foñ ená aè m ba aè nfeè' Nyúè aè m laèa ená e be geèe Jisoès aè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì nfeseè naè, a kaêa. AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' e m geèe raèraâ Lávïì aè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì naè, e kaa ka'.	Inasmuch as he was not made priest without the taking of an oath
Wàʼ wɛ̀ rìŋ ye a?	Do you know him?
Judaès ce aè m ba Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ka', aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, aè be duèñshi yoè nyor neè weèr tá weèr yá wáè tá beèe enjep ñgoèñ a yá wáè ka' aè njáâá ká?”	"Judas (not Iscariot) said to him, ""Lord, what has happened that you are about to reveal yourself to us, and not to the world?"""
A ka' ce yoèp wa'a, beâe bgoèrgoèr ce ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa caè a ce gú'shi njeptii ñwáè ce e cu mbe kaèbaèraè' a ba nteèe aè nfeè' wááwá naè a ce kuè'si ye. Woweèe a co'nïì map mtaa kúú embe tuè, a lá njeptii ñwáè anaè, a yop yáá enáê,	the twenty-four elders fall down before him who sits on the throne, and worship him who lives forever and ever, and throw their crowns before the throne, saying,
Mnoèñ mo' vi ka' caèa, Fálïìs aè vú a ñgwa yïì ce a m ce too ená Dusiláè ce aè m ba muu Juês. E tuu beèe, a vú neè Poêl, Pol aè ka' vúè a suñ aèmboè rbyemïû neè Jisos Kraêis, e ce yu'shi.	But after some days, Felix came with Drusilla, his wife, who was a Jewess, and sent for Paul, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ Jesus.
Yu ba broñ ce ñwáè roñ aè buu ce vi ke geèe ñgaèñ ka' túr rmoèoshïì aè rgeèe yuu bebep.	But each one is tempted, when he is drawn away by his own lust, and enticed.
Mbɛp ce fʉte ye.	She is feeling cold.
Máâ ke loo neè weèe, ce loo neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	always in every request of mine on behalf of you all making my requests with joy,
AÈde' ñwáè rfaè' fa' neè mmasaè bbaa ka'. E ka' gee wa'a, baná e be baèa moè', koèñ moè', yu'ni neè moè', loèr moè' aè yuu ka'. AÈde' aè fa' neè Nyúè ker fa' neè mbaèa ka'.”	"No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to one, and despise the other. You aren't able to serve God and mammon."""
A m laèa ená ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr ncoèo ca ka' baná ñgaèñ be fyeèni yuu káè yuu yuu ka'. Ncoèo anaè yu nombaè efa rlii nyaèa anaè.	and that no one would be able to buy or to sell, unless he has that mark, the name of the beast or the number of his name.
Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbaèa, yu' neè yuu ce m be laèa neè weèe. War neè, ker koosimnse njo' ñgá' ce e be vúè neè weèe.	Come now, you rich, weep and howl for your miseries that are coming on you.
À be jùu woowèe kù koni.	They are just going now.
Jus a ka' yu' yuu ce Jisoès aè laèa, a ku ker gheter ba aè se ená a ba yú ye njobeè' e m ku bú' ba ncir mmbomntaa caè'caè' ka', e m ker laa foñ ená Nyúè yu yïì taê. Baná e m ce laèa ená a Nyúè a ku ba yáánïì.	For this cause therefore the Jews sought all the more to kill him, because he not only broke the Sabbath, but also called God his own Father, making himself equal with God.
E m ker gee yuu mo' ce yi m bep a caa ñger. E m koo Joân a fa aè shañ.	added this also to them all, that he shut up John in prison.
Weèe túr ñger aè rgeèe buu wááwá. Ka' weèe túr ñger ca wa'a, yu buu wááwá ce aède' vi ja' beèe ka'. Yi yu mini ená weèe túr ñger aè rgeèe buu wááwá. Ka' yi yu mini ená weèe túr ñger aè rgeèe buu ca wa'a, yu buu wááwá ce aède' vi gee beèe a táá tatap njep buu ce yu vi Tata Jisos Kraâis ka'.	"All things are lawful for me, but not all things are profitable. ""All things are lawful for me,"" but not all things build up."
Bkaŋ bvisò bvi yu bbeer.	Our pans are red.
Yàa nfur ce jɛ̀ŋ.	My wound is expanding.
E ka' baèptir Jisoès wáá, e ku fúú enjep roè. Awá rbuu li mú'tïì, e yá aèmboè Yú' Nyúè yi suèu mbe yeâ nduèu aèmboè beèñ wa'a.	Jesus, when he was baptized, went up directly from the water: and behold, the heavens were opened to him. He saw the Spirit of God descending as a dove, and coming on him.
Yi ñgeâe ca yi ce yá'ni seèe ená seèe borni ñgeèe ce beèe ce a máñni Nyúè a ke geèe, ker borni efa rláè ntee aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na. Yi ce yá'ni seèe foñ ená seèe cu rcu ce li yu neè bfee-ñwáè, ba mini tá yiseèe ñgeèe enjep ñgoèñ na yi bo ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	instructing us to the intent that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we would live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world;
E m ce kar aè mnduè sheè ba aè mtuèu neètú' ba neèmootïì a ce war, ker ce sháshi yïì nyor neè bluèr.	Always, night and day, in the tombs and in the mountains, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones.
Máè ka' yá ye, a gwe a noñ njep yeâ tïìi aèmboè ñwáè ce e kwe wa'a. E lá yi bo maè' mbe máâ nduè a laa enáê, “Fa wáp ka', m yu ñwáè entoèmbïì a ba ñwáè elúèsimbuèu.	"When I saw him, I fell at his feet like a dead man. He laid his right hand on me, saying, ""Don't be afraid. I am the first and the last,"
Cena a ñgá' embenjïì yïì entombïì. Yïì embenjïì mo be koni nfeè' múcaèr.	The second woe is past. Behold, the third woe comes quickly.
Mɛ̀ ku du mbà Kaʼ ba nkàràʼ mòʼsir.	I have gone down to Ka only once.
Muu ca aè m kuè' aè nyoèr, a ker ku' aè yú'. E ka' kuè', a ku ce cu ba aè rïìñ caar a ba' aè noèñ ce yi m ba ená e be fúú aè múè beèe Isráèl.	The child was growing, and becoming strong in spirit, and was in the desert until the day of his public appearance to Israel.
Waè' weèr ce laèa buu ca wa'a tá weèe bo rïìñ ená weèr yu ba beâe mini a? Yi yu wa' ka'. Waè' yi yu ená wer aè ba fa ba ñwaè' neè weèe tá wee weèe sañ ñwaè' neè weèr tá beèe a riñ aèmboè weèr ce faè' a weâe mú, aèmboè beèe mo' a ke geèe naè a? Yi yu wa' ka'.	Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? Or do we need, as do some, letters of commendation to you or from you?
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñgúè beèe e seè'ni be kweñger wáá tá buu ca ka' ba ka'.	Most certainly I tell you, this generation will not pass away, until all these things are accomplished.
Woweèe a ka' loo neè rbyemïì-ñwáè, Tata ja' ñwáè yañ anaè. Ka' ba ená ñwáè anaè aè m geèe buu bbebep, baná Nyúè be foèosi ye.	and the prayer of faith will heal him who is sick, and the Lord will raise him up. If he has committed sins, he will be forgiven.
Cɛ̀ʼ ca zhi zhiʼ mɛ̀.	This dress is tight for me.
Bsoogáè mo' a m loèr Jisoès a niñ aègho mbe dïì' mnsa' embe nto' ce govanoè aè m ce cu mbo, a ká' bsoogáè wááwá mbo.	The soldiers led him away within the court, which is the Praetorium; and they called together the whole cohort.
M ce wáp máná m be vúè, tá Nyúè gee tá rïìtu yi koo máè fa weâe bsii, tá nyor bep máè, tá m war njo' beèe ce cu rcu rrara ka', a kupse ka' naè. M be war njobeè' woweèe a ce saèki, a kúti aè bbáp.	that again when I come my God would humble me before you, and I would mourn for many of those who have sinned before now, and not repented of the uncleanness and sexual immorality and lustfulness which they committed.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' efa múè bcïìndap Nyúè ce a m túr bghee saèambaê, mñgá' vi ba njo naè aè vú a laa neè máè enáê, “Vúè tá m duñshi wáè ñgwaguèu ce e yu ñgwa Muu Njeèe.”	"One of the seven angels who had the seven bowls, who were loaded with the seven last plagues came, and he spoke with me, saying, ""Come here. I will show you the wife, the Lamb's bride."""
Ñwáè ce e m cu mbenduè mmbaè' naè aè lor yïì saè' a kep buu enjep ñgoèñ aègho wááwá.	He who sat on the cloud thrust his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
Wèe à ku vʉ meemnjiʼ a?	Have you come by yourselves.
Woweèe a lor kúè, a cúú yuu rïìr rir aè cuèu efa gho, a suusi njep roè a yá ená rcoomïì efa rdip anaè li yu aèmboè mkoo mbaa. A ka' keèr duè mú ntaèm moè', a ker suusi kúè anaè njo a yá ená rcoomïì efa gho li yu mkoo ncoèp-ta-aè-rrúèú.	They took soundings, and found twenty fathoms. After a little while, they took soundings again, and found fifteen fathoms.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Musïìs aè m fa njïì ená ñwáè aè ka' koèñ aè rjuèu ñgwa yïì, e sañ ñwaè' fa neè ye aè rduèñshi ená e saè'si guèu, ka' juèu ye.”	"They said, ""Moses allowed a certificate of divorce to be written, and to divorce her."""
Geewa'a, beâe aè ñgoèñ anaè a m kani aè rkoni ye njobeè' e m ce vúè aè rcaèa duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	They didn't receive him, because he was traveling with his face set towards Jerusalem.
A mbuèu ce máè laèa máná weèe vúê, tá m yá weèe, tá seèe de'. Kwaèñ yu máè kuè rkoo seè'ni na ba aètu ñwáè ce beèe Isráèl a m cu a ce keè'.”	"For this cause therefore I asked to see you and to speak with you. For because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain."""
Zhi bòŋ enɛ sèe lɛ mncir Nyʉ̀.	It is good that we should follow Godʼs commandments.
Woweèe a m loo weèr, a loo neè mini-ñwáè ená weèr gee yuu boèñboñ neè woweèe, fa woweèe njïì foñ tá a ja' beèe Nyúè ce a yu aè ñgá'.	begging us with much entreaty to receive this grace and the fellowship in the service to the saints.
E ba buʼŋgùŋ bèe a kaʼ caŋni ce vʉ̀ ŋgàabaa à ba nè a gwar ye nè sàʼ.	She ululated and before people came, the madman had already cut her with a cutlass.
Ñwáè ce e ka' gee yïì nyor ba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor Tata Jisos Kraâis baná Jisos Kraâis a ñwáè anaè a yu ñwáè moè'sir aè yú'.	But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
E seki enɛ e be lìp mɛ̀.	He is determined to beat me.
Yuu ce yi be geèe tá weèe riñ ená nsuñ ca yu mini yi yu ená, weèe be duè yá muu aèmboè a kur njep bcáè', a noñsi njep rghii njeèe.”	"This is the sign to you: you will find a baby wrapped in strips of cloth, lying in a feeding trough."""
M ce laèa neè wáè aè bsii Nyúè ce e ke geèe buu wááwá ba bteèe, ba aè bsii Jisos Kraâis ce e m laèa boèñboñ aè bsii Pontos Pailáèt.	I command you before God, who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate testified the good confession,
Mɛ̀ tii rlàŋ a yɛ Nfò nje kìbùʼ.	I have opened the curtain and seen Nfor in the palace council hall.
Nyúè ka' ker gee ñwáè moè' ye ye riñ yuu mo' ce aède' e suñ beèe, baná ñwáè ce e ba ce laèa naè fa ye njïì foñ tá e laêa.	But if a revelation is made to another sitting by, let the first keep silent.
Máè ke' geèe wa' ka', njobeè' m ce koèñ aè rgeèe yuu ce aè buu efa rrïìñ enjo ka'. M ce koèñ ba máná aè ka' ce gee yuu boèñboñ neè máè aè gee ba aèmboè wáè gwáá.	But I was willing to do nothing without your consent, that your goodness would not be as of necessity, but of free will.
Wɛ̀ bèesi rbipshì anà yɛɛnì.	You have answered that question correctly.
Jisoès aè vúê, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “A fa ñger embe buèu ba enjep nsheè wááwá neè máè.	"Jesus came to them and spoke to them, saying, ""All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth."
E m cu aèfo aè mnoèñ mñkyeèe, Sataèn aè ce moèoshi ye. Mnyaâa aè rïìñ vi m ba aè dïì' anaè, bcïìndap Nyúè vi ce keè'ni ye.	He was there in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan. He was with the wild animals; and the angels were serving him.
Woweèe a m lá', a wáp seê, a ce kwaè'shi ená woweèe a yá ba nyir.	But they were terrified and filled with fear, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.
Fa laèa blaâa bebep ka'. Laèa ba yuu boèñboñ ce aède' yi ja' ñwáè, tá wo blaèa anaè vi bo vúè neè rboèñ neè beèe ce a yu' vi.	Let no corrupt speech proceed out of your mouth, but such as is good for building up as the need may be, that it may give grace to those who hear.
Yu ba ñwáè ce e ce laèa ená e yu yáánïì ce aède' e ba yáánïì ghup aè bsii Tata ka'. Ñwáè ce e yu yáánïì aè bsii Tata yu ñwáè ce Tata rïìñ ená e yu yáánïì.	For it isn't he who commends himself who is approved, but whom the Lord commends.
A ke gèe kìnfɛ̀r ntɛ̀ʼ ce lùu.	When we crack jokes the ambience is high.
Maè'shi neè woweèe. Woweèe a yu mnfeèp. Nfeèp ka' ce duèñshi nfeèp moè' nduunjïì, baná woweèe a be gweèñger njep beè'teè bsïìp.”	"Leave them alone. They are blind guides of the blind. If the blind guide the blind, both will fall into a pit."""
Jisoès weèe a ka' naèti ce duè, beèe a vú neè ñwáè moè' ce e m ba lúr, yú' nyúèrkaè' yi ba njep ye.	As they went out, behold, a mute man who was demon possessed was brought to him.
Lee rkap rli ghɛɛte kaʼ.	Your bride price is not enough.
M túr buu moè' ce vi ce suñ aèmboè máè caa vïû Joân. Mfaè' ce m ce geèe ce yaè Ta aè fa máè ñger ená m gee misi mi ce suñ aèmboè máè, a ce duèñshi ená yaè Ta aè tuu máè.	But the testimony which I have is greater than that of John, for the works which the Father gave me to accomplish, the very works that I do, testify about me, that the Father has sent me.
Jisoès aè kúsïì neè woweèe enáê, “Musïìs aè m sañ ncir ca neè weèe njobeè' weèe teèe btu.	"But Jesus said to them, ""For your hardness of heart, he wrote you this commandment."
Yi yu aètáèr aè ryu' blaèa ca ka'. Máè yá ya máná vi kuèu Kraâis ba yïì coêr.	This mystery is great, but I speak concerning Christ and of the assembly.
Tɛ Nyʉ̀ kaʼ kèe boo ŋgòŋ, nlàa zhi m ku ba.	Before God created the world, the Word was there.
Bcirmbèŋ vi ke ba banɛ bèe be dù à mŋkʉ̀ʉ kaʼ.	When we have early morning rain which lasts for long, people donʼt go to the farm.
Beèe mo' a ka' tá rïìñ ená m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraâis ka', máè rïìñ máná weèe rïìñ wa'a njobeè' weèe yu ncoèo ce e geèe beèe a riñ ená m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Tataê.	If to others I am not an apostle, yet at least I am to you; for you are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
Jakoèp aè m túr rdip rtuñ aèfo. Jisoès aè ka' baè' fa rdip anaè, a lúshi aègee mo njobeè' e m jáèr a sáê. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè nyúè aè ká' a ce kuèu ñgoèñ.	Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being tired from his journey, sat down by the well. It was about the sixth hour.
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, keñ aè ba mbe ntee rdip, Jisoès aè ba nje waa ñkúè mimñgi'.	When evening had come, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he was alone on the land.
Pol aè suu njep nsheè a gwe mbe yeâ nduè, a baa ye nje nyoèr, a laa enáê, “Weèe fa wáp ka', e ku bii nteèe.”	"Paul went down, and fell upon him, and embracing him said, ""Don't be troubled, for his life is in him."""
Cena yi ka' mïì, yuu mo' yi coo máè mbaè tuè' embe buèu aèmboè mnjeèndoñ ma kúr beèe wa'a. A m ce yoèp yáá enáê, “AÈleèluyaè! Rluèñ ba foèo ba ñger wááwá yi ba mba yeâ mmboè.	"After these things I heard something like a loud voice of a great multitude in heaven, saying, ""Hallelujah! Salvation, power, and glory belong to our God:"
Stáfaèn aè m túr rboâñ Nyúè ba ñger Nyúè seê, a gee buu bghagha' ba buu bbáèá aè múè beèe.	Stephen, full of faith and power, performed great wonders and signs among the people.
Nyúè aè naèa ye a cuusi aè li rkoo maè', e koo Yú' Rara ce yïì ta aè m kaè' naè. Baná yuu ce weèe ce yá a ker ce yu' seè'ni na, yu ba yú' anaè ce e ce fa neè weèr.	Being therefore exalted by the right hand of God, and having received from the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this, which you now see and hear.
E m tarni ka', a ku byemi ená Nyúè be geèe yuu ce e m laèa. E m ku táá tatap njo' li rbyemïì, a ce kuè'si Nyúè.	Yet, looking to the promise of God, he didn't waver through unbelief, but grew strong through faith, giving glory to God,
tá yi ka' ba aètáèr Nyúè bo fúr máè efa rkwe, fa máè ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	if by any means I may attain to the resurrection from the dead.
Bbyeèñge a m ba aèfo aèñgoo, a táá aè njïìsaèp a ce fyá'. AÈ m ba bbyeèñge ce a m loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du a Jisoès weèe, tá a bo jaè' ye aè buu.	Many women were there watching from afar, who had followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him.
Ñwáè aè ka' top mkúâñ bráêd, too bráâd yïì entoèmbïì fa neè Nyúè, baná bráâd wááwá ce e be toèo efa mkúèñ anaè yu yïû Nyúè. Mñgaâñ ce ka' ba vi Nyúè, baná mmba' ce yu vi foñ.	If the first fruit is holy, so is the lump. If the root is holy, so are the branches.
Jisoès aè fúr ye embe múè beèe, a fa ye mntummbo mbaè btuè', a ce mce, a joo ye rlee aègho,	He took him aside from the multitude, privately, and put his fingers into his ears, and he spat, and touched his tongue.
Bfúr waê, kuushi neè yuu ce m be laèa neè weèe na. Moè' efa weèe aè ka' ma'shi nduunjïì Nyúè, nfúr moè' ja', kúsi ye njep nduunjïì Nyúè, baná nfúr anaè aè tee yú' ñwáâ mbembep caè efa rkwe, a ker búsi ku' buu bbebep magoèr.	Brothers, if any among you wanders from the truth, and someone turns him back, let him know that he who turns a sinner from the error of his way will save a soul from death, and will cover a multitude of sins.
Yi yu ená ñwáè ce e ka' boñshi li ryoèñ baná e be bá li. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá boñshi li ryoèñ njep ñgoèñ na ka', baná ñgaèñ be túr li ryoèñ, cu nfeseè.	He who loves his life will lose it. He who hates his life in this world will keep it to eternal life.
Woowèe a sɛɛ nàʼ.	They have slaughtered a cow.
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Tu yi kar wáè embo.” Muu anaè aè laa tatap se ená yi yu mini wa'a. Woweèe a laa enáê, “Yu ncïìndap Nyúè ce e ke keè'ni Pitaè.”	"They said to her, ""You are crazy!"" But she insisted that it was so. They said, ""It is his angel."""
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m leèse aè rloèr bráêd, a ku túr ba ntu' bráâd mo'sir mbe keñ.	They forgot to take bread; and they didn't have more than one loaf in the boat with them.
Jisoès aè laa neè beèe ker ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê,	Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples,
Jisoès aè lor bráâd ta ba nca baa ca, a ke' mbe buèu, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a gapshi neè beèe anaè.	He took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to the sky, he blessed them, and broke them, and gave them to the disciples to set before the multitude.
Ñwáè moè' aè m be yá Nyúè ka'. Muu Nyúè ce e ku ba moè'sir, a ker ba mntee Nyúè, a ye ce e duèñshi seèe njáèá ñwáè ce yïì Ta yu.	No one has seen God at any time. The one and only Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “E be yúshi beâe bbebep ca aè njïû mbembep seê, láè yi nsuu anaè neè beâe jáá ce nfeè' ce a ke tee msini aè ka' gháá tá woweèe a bo tee mi fa neè ye.”	"They told him, ""He will miserably destroy those miserable men, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will give him the fruit in its season."""
Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “ÁÈno”. A ka' niñ mbe ndaèp, Jisoès aè ká' a laa yuu neè ye entombïì. E m laèa enáê, “AÈ ce kwaè'shi yo wáná ká Saimúèn? Beèe ce a ke laè' mbaèa neè bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na e ke ba weâe ká? E ke laè' ñgaâa to' káè bkïìloè?”	"He said, ""Yes."" When he came into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, ""What do you think, Simon? From whom do the kings of the earth receive toll or tribute? From their children, or from strangers?"""
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
loèr yeèr nfeè' ce geèe rloo, keèr ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè.”	"But we will continue steadfastly in prayer and in the ministry of the word."""
Beâe aèfo a ka' yá ye a rïîñ, a cep ntuu neè beèe ce a m ba aè mla' wááwá aè ñgoèñ anaè. Woweèe a vú neè beèe wááwá ce a m ce yañ,	When the people of that place recognized him, they sent into all that surrounding region, and brought to him all who were sick,
ba onïìk, ba kaèniliyaèn, ba kwoêt, ba báèrïîl, ba topaès, ba krisopráès, ba jasïìn, ker ba amátïìs.	the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the seventh, chrysolite; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, topaz; the tenth, chrysoprasus; the eleventh, jacinth; and the twelfth, amethyst.
“M ce loo neè woweèe. M ce loo ba neè ñgoèñ ca ka', m ce loo ba neè beèe ce wáè fa neè máè na njobeè' woweèe a yu yoè beèe.	I pray for them. I don't pray for the world, but for those whom you have given me, for they are yours.
AÈ m ba entoèmbïì, Nyúè aè gee beèe a riñ yuu anaè ka'. AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na e tuu yi yú' yi gee yïì beèe ce e m ce aè ñgaâa ntuu, ker ba beèe ce a ce suñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a riñ naè, a riñ yuu anaè.	which in other generations was not made known to the children of men, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets in the Spirit;
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a toshïì ye aè ku' buu goèr.	The chief priests accused him of many things.
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir moè' aè naèti mbekïì aè rmoèoshi Jisoès, a bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, yuu ce aède' m gee ka' koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè a ká?”	"Behold, a certain lawyer stood up and tested him, saying, ""Teacher, what shall I do to inherit eternal life?"""
Btañshïì anaè vi m ka' ba túr njáèá ñger ca, beèe a m ba keèr ce tañshi btañshïì ka' njobeè' woweèe a m ba baè raa mïìsi, keèr rïìñ ená woweèe a yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep ka'.	Or else wouldn't they have ceased to be offered, because the worshippers, having been once cleansed, would have had no more consciousness of sins?
Yap ñger mnsár aè Stáfaèn weèe yi m sáè njobeè' Stáfaèn aè m ce laèa ba neè bfee ba ñger Yú' Rara ce Nyúè aè m fa ye.	They weren't able to withstand the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè bipshïì neè Stáfaèn enáê, “Yi yu wa' a?”	"The high priest said, ""Are these things so?"""
Foèosi weèr yeèr buu bbebep, njobeè' wer weèr e ke foèosi ñwáè wááwá ce e geèe yuu bebep neè weèr. Fa maè'shi tá rmoèoshïì li vú neè weèr ka'.’ ”	"Forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive everyone who is indebted to us. Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one.'"""
Caè'ni neè AÈsinkiritoès ba Fïìlágoèn ba Hámïìs ba Paètoèropaès ba Hámaès, ker ba bfúr ce a yu a woweèe wááwá.	Greet Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers who are with them.
Wɛ̀r ye à m̀ tʉr mŋkàʼni nyʉ̀ sondɛ̀.	Him and I had an appointment on Sunday.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Boo, weèe aè koo nca ka' a?” Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “AÈi'.”	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""Children, have you anything to eat?"" They answered him, ""No."""
Mɛ̀ yɛ nè laa rlir.	I saw it myself.
Beèe a be laèa neè weèe enáê, ‘Yáê, a ye njena’ na, káè ená ‘Yáê, a ye mbena’ na. Weèe fa naèti duè a waâp mbuèu ka',	They will tell you, 'Look, here!' or 'Look, there!' Don't go away, nor follow after them,
Jisoès aè ka' yu' yuu ce woweèe a ce laèa, a laa neè Jairoès enáê, “Fa wáp ka', kuè byemi neè máè.”	"But Jesus, when he heard the message spoken, immediately said to the ruler of the synagogue, ""Don't be afraid, only believe."""
Beèe mo' ca a feè'shi buu kuu Jisos Kraâis njobeè' woweèe a ce koèñ aè rba beâe bgoèrgoèr. Yuu ce woweèe a ce feè'shi yu ba yuu ce woweèe a túr njep ntee ka'. Woweèe a ku ce roèo ená mluè mi ku ce koo máè aèmboè m yu mbe shañ na.	but the latter out of love, knowing that I am appointed for the defense of the Good News.
Yàp mâ à ŋòʼshi njàp à mkìŋ.	Their mother has dished the soup into the pots.
Mnyaèa njáèá jáá jáèá jáá vi m ba njep cáè' anaè, ker ba buu moè' aèmboè mnyo, ba bbar, ba bsiñ.	in which were all kinds of four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, reptiles, and birds of the sky.
E m ce jáèr aè dïì' anaè, beèe a ce yu' faè dïì' e yu, byá'se ñgaâa byañ, vú aègho, yá ye.	and ran around that whole region, and began to bring those who were sick, on their mats, to where they heard he was.
“Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsi a cu mbe nta' Musïìs.	"saying, ""The scribes and the Pharisees sat on Moses' seat."
Wèr ye à ràte.	He and I are related.
Mbàa yee zhi yû?	Where is your money?
Beèe wááwá ce a m yu' vi a m ce kuushi vi, a ce laèa enáê, “Njáèá muu ca be keè ba njáèá muu ce ká?” Bo Tata Nyúè yi m ba mbe yeâ nduè neè mini-ñwáè.	"All who heard them laid them up in their heart, saying, ""What then will this child be?"" The hand of the Lord was with him."
Jisoès aè ka' kuè bii mïìsi efa cuèu, Judaès ce e m ba moè' efa yïì beèe ce ncoèp- baa-aè-rrúèú naè aè toseè. E m ba a ku' beèe ce a m túr bsaè' ba mmbaèñ. Beèe ce a m tuu woweèe aè m ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ker ba bleebeèe.	Immediately, while he was still speaking, Judas, one of the twelve, came--and with him a multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders.
Yuʼ ca zhi bàŋ gòr a bonî.	This banana is too ripe and has become soft.
Ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m loèr nfeè' a fyá' njep múè rluèñ ca boèñboñ seê. Woweèe a m suñ beèe aèmboè rboâñntee Nyúè ce yi m ba ená weèe be koni.	Concerning this salvation, the prophets sought and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace that would come to you,
E du a cu mbe rtuèu Oleèf, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yá ye, a ku ba a woweèe mbo caè'caè'. Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Suñ weèr nfeè' ce buu ca vi be koni. Yuu ce yi be duèñshi ená aè ce vúè, ñgoèñ yi ce mïì foñ yu ká?”	"As he sat on the Mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, ""Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign of your coming, and of the end of the age?"""
E m geèe wa'a, a ce kuushi mkaè'ni ce e m geèe neè Abraèham ker ba neè yïì ñgúè beèe aè nfeè' sïìp.”	"As he spoke to our fathers, to Abraham and his seed forever."""
Máè mú bu' mmbo neè ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu ená woweèe a fúr yú' anaè enjep ye, woweèe a moèo aè rfúr yi laèr.”	"I begged your disciples to cast it out, and they couldn't."""
Jisoès aè m laèa wa'a a ce taase Felep taase njobeè' e m ku riñ yuu ce e be geèe.	This he said to test him, for he himself knew what he would do.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Beèe ca wááwá a ka' ma' wáè, m ma' wáè ka'.”	"But Peter said to him, ""Although all will be offended, yet I will not."""
Máè yá aèmboè mbeèñ ce baèpñger a ce rúèúñger, a ce wañger embe kaèbaèraè'. Máè yá bturkañ saèamba aèmboè vi tááte kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè' a ce raa. Bturkañ anaè vi táá aètu byú' Nyúè ce vi yu saèambaê.	Out of the throne proceed lightnings, sounds, and thunders. There were seven lamps of fire burning before his throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe aè ká' a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè ntee rïìñ aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.	In those days, John the Baptizer came, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, saying,
Ka' yi yu wa'a, m be fúú efa rkwe, du aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, tá weèe vú koni máè aèfo.”	"However, after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee."""
Pitaè aè ku bii njep mambe anaè, muunje moè' ce e m ce faè' neè ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì,	As Peter was in the courtyard below, one of the maids of the high priest came,
AÈmboè weèr ce cu neè nyor ca njep ñgoèñ na, weèr ce shooñger aèmboè weèr aè byáè' lá ntáèr yi ce rïìr se wa'a. Yi yu ba ená weèr ce koèñ aè rco' cáâ' rúèú ca ka', weèr ce koèñ ba aè ryar cáâ' fi, tá cáâ' rúèú yi kupse dúèdúè.	For indeed we who are in this tent do groan, being burdened; not that we desire to be unclothed, but that we desire to be clothed, that what is mortal may be swallowed up by life.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Yú' nyúèrkaè' yi yu njep máè ka'; m ce yu'ni ba neè yaè Taê, weèe aè ke' ce yu'ni ye yu neè máè ka'.	"Jesus answered, ""I don't have a demon, but I honor my Father, and you dishonor me."
Jisos Kraâis ye ye aè m kwe nfeè' moè'sir aètu beèe magoèr tá e bo siñsi yaèp buu bbebep. E be keè kúti njep ñgoèñ na, kúti tá e bo siñsi buu bbebep beèe ka'. E be keè kúti tá e bo geèe tá beèe ce a ce keè' ye a luêñ.	so Christ also, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, without sin, to those who are eagerly waiting for him for salvation.
tá ñwáè mbaèa ye ye ce lu'shi ená Nyúè aè suèusi ye njep nsheè, njobeè' e be kuè loè ba aèmboè fúèlawaè ce e táá ntïìni ce foo, tú' e ce raa e banïì yuushi naè.	and the rich, in that he is made humble, because like the flower in the grass, he will pass away.
Leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye eluâuñgoèñ naè yi ku ba wa' foñ. E m ye leè' anaè, a gee mkaè'ni anaè ba neè Abraèham ba yïì ñgúè. Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, “Neè yoè ñgúè”, ce yi yu ená e m ce laèa ba aèmboè beèe aèñgoo ka', e m ce laèa ba aèmboè ñwáè moè'sir, ñwáè anaè aè ba Jisos Kraêis.	"Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He doesn't say, ""To seeds,"" as of many, but as of one, ""To your seed,"" which is Christ."
Suŋ nè nè ye enɛ wèe à yuʼ nè wee btʉ̀ʼ.	Tell him that you heard it yourselves.
E m laèa enáê, “Muu ñkúú aè m duè aè to' mo' aènjïìsaèp seê, ená a bo duè ghar ye aè ñkúú tá e ka' kúti.	"He said therefore, ""A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return."
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce weèe aè m ba bkwaèa neè buu bbebep naè, ñgeâe yáánïì yi m túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè weèe ka'.	For when you were servants of sin, you were free in regard to righteousness.
Beèe efa yeâ laè' ker ba beèe ce a m yá aè nfeè' ce e m ce loo buu naè, a laa enáê, “A'a! AÈmboè ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce e m ce cu ce loo buu naè a?”	"The neighbors therefore, and those who saw that he was blind before, said, ""Isn't this he who sat and begged?"""
Beèe ce a m da'se njobeè' a m yú Stáfaèn, ñgá' aè konïì cor naè, a m duè aè bdïì' jáá jáèá jáá. Beèe mo' a m duè aè ñgoâñ Foènishaè, beèe mo' a du aè to' Saiproès, beèe mo' a du aè rla' Antïìyoèk. Woweèe a m duè aè bdïì' ca wa'a, a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè ba neè Jus caè'caè'.	They therefore who were scattered abroad by the oppression that arose about Stephen traveled as far as Phoenicia, Cyprus, and Antioch, speaking the word to no one except to Jews only.
Loè neè tá seèe ce duè. Ñwáè ce e fyeni máè naè yu aètútú.”	"Arise, let's be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand."""
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená a ka' tá bi ñwáè neè mdip ker ba neè yú' ka', aède' ñgaèñ niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka'.	"Jesus answered, ""Most certainly I tell you, unless one is born of water and spirit, he can't enter into the Kingdom of God!"
Máè suñ woweèe ená ndeèe Rum yu ená a ka' vú neè ñwáè ce e geèe faèa, baná beèe ce a laèa ená e geèe faèa naè, a be vúè, tá ye ye laa yuu kuu faèa ce a laèa ená e geèe, tá a ka' teni mnsa'.	To whom I answered that it is not the custom of the Romans to give up any man to destruction, before the accused has met the accusers face to face, and has had opportunity to make his defense concerning the matter laid against him.
E ka' laèa ca, rïìtu yi koo beèe wááwá ce a m baèa ye, bár beèe wááwá a yu' rboèñ aè buu bboèñboñ wááwá ce e m geèe.	As he said these things, all his adversaries were disappointed, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
Baná káè aè yu Jus áè, káè aè yu ñwáè enje jáá áè, káè aè yu ñkwaèa áè, káè aè yu muu áè, káè aè yu mbañruèñwáè áè, káè aè yu njeñwáè áè, jáá jáèá jáá yu aègho ka' njobeè' weèe wááwá yu ñwáè moè'sir njep Jisos Kraêis.	There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither slave nor free man, there is neither male nor female; for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
Ñwáè ce a m geèe yuu báèá neè ye, e jár anaè, aè m caèa bfeè' mñkyeèe.	For the man on whom this miracle of healing was performed was more than forty years old.
To wɛ̀ rìŋ enɛ m̀ be fʉʉ vʉ̀ àyàŋsè.	You know that I will be coming tomorrow.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ yu ñwáè rboâñtu, Saimúèn, muu Jonaè, njobeè' aè geèe ñwáè wáè ka' riñ yuu ce wáè laèa na ka', aè geèe ba yaè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu.	"Jesus answered him, ""Blessed are you, Simon Bar Jonah, for flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven."
Máè fyá' a yá nyaèabaèraâ' mbúú. Ñwáè ce e m cu mbe nduè mo aè túr ñgúú mbaè boè. A m fa ye rtaa ce a ke fa neè beèe ce a maè' bïìr a so naè. E cañ mbe nyaèabaèraè' anaè a ce maè' bïìr tá e bo keèr so.	And behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it had a bow. A crown was given to him, and he came forth conquering, and to conquer.
Mboè weèe rïìñ weená yuu wááwá ce ñwáè e ke ye yi ke duè njep rbúè, lo fúú a?	Don't you understand that whatever goes into the mouth passes into the belly, and then out of the body?
njobeè' ñwáè wááwá ce e yu muu Nyúè e ke so ñgoèñ. Yuu ce yi so ñgoèñ yu liseèe rbyemïì.	For whatever is born of God overcomes the world. This is the victory that has overcome the world: your faith.
Be keè ba aè nfeè' moè' tá m tuu ñwáè rjaè' moè' neè weèe ese Taèr. Ñwáè anaè yu Yú' ce yi loè ese Taèr, yi ke suñ beèe yuu mini. Yi be vúè tá yi suñ beèe aèmboè máè.	"When the Counselor has come, whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father, he will testify about me.
John	Joân	15	27	Wee weèe foñ be suñ aèmboè máè njobeè' seèe aè m ku ba aèbee efa rkáè'.	You will also testify, because you have been with me from the beginning.
John	Joân	16	1	“Máè suñ weèe buu ca tá weèe bo táá tatap, keè' kúti njïìnjïì ka'.	These things have I spoken to you, so that you wouldn't be caused to stumble."
Zhìsò à mʉ bep e.	I want to buy a new car.
E bi muu a saŋ ye mbɛ̀ʼ.	She was delivered of a baby and has circumcised him.
Caè'ni neè Rufoès ce e yu muu rlii efa múè beèe Tata naè, ker ba yïì ma ce e m gá' neè máè aèmboè muu yïì wa'a naè.	Greet Rufus, the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Ñwáè ce e m cu mbe nyaèabaèraâ' mbúú naè aè lor saè' ce e m ba ku yeâ cuèu naè a yúshi bár beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu nyaèa anaè aègho, bsiñ vi vú a ye bgúâú beèe ca, a sáê.	The rest were killed with the sword of him who sat on the horse, the sword which came forth out of his mouth. All the birds were filled with their flesh.
Baná yuu ce aède' ñwáè nsuu gee neè woweèe yu ká? E be vúè yúshi woweèe, láè nsuu neè beâe jáá.	What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.
E m bi muu rñgoèo, aè ba muu mbañruè. E m kur muu anaè njep bcáè', a noñsi njep rghii njeèe njobeè' ndap aè m ruu neè woweèe.	She brought forth her firstborn son, and she wrapped him in bands of cloth, and laid him in a feeding trough, because there was no room for them in the inn.
Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú lo buu efa rkoni bghoènïì Nyúè ka'. Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú lo ba aèmboè ñgúè cece' ce ñwáè e ke si'si mbaè mmboè, e joèo byee neè mmbo vi ku ce' foñ naè ka'. Njáèá beèe ce a yu aèmboè ñgúè cece' a ke vúè yap ba neè ñgá', bepsi ñgeâe beèe magoèr.	looking carefully lest there be any man who falls short of the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up trouble you, and many be defiled by it;
È ku cu mbɛ̀ʼnsʉ̀r.	His is still uncircumcised.
E lor ndoñ, a ka' yoèñshi Nyúè, a fa neè woweèe, woweèe wááwá a noê.	He took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave to them. They all drank of it.
A m taa byáèá a baa a Jisoès weèe mbe bkïìntaa, moè' aè ba aè bo maè', moè' aè ba a yeâ bo ñkoèp.	Then there were two robbers crucified with him, one on his right hand and one on the left.
M ce vú aè ryá wáè seè'ni, a ce laèa buu ca njep ñgoèñ na, tá la rlu'shïì li bo mïìsi njep woweèe.	But now I come to you, and I say these things in the world, that they may have my joy made full in themselves.
Weèe ce koñni wa'a njobeè' weèe rïìñ ená nfeè' ce weèe aè ba lá' efa mmirloè aè gháá. Nfeè' ce Nyúè be geèe tá seèe luñ yu seè'ni aètútú a caa aèmboè e m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m káè' byemi neè Jisos Kraâis naè.	Do this, knowing the time, that it is already time for you to awaken out of sleep, for salvation is now nearer to us than when we first believed.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce Nyúè aè m ce aèmboè e m koèñ, ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis, tá m bo suñ beèe ená Nyúè aè kaè' ená e be fa beèe ryoèñ ce nfeseè njïì enjep Jisos Kraêis.	Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, according to the promise of the life which is in Christ Jesus,
Máè rïìñ ñgá' ce weèe ce yá. Máè rïìñ fuèp ce e koo weèe. Yi yu mini ghup ená weèe yu ñgaâa fuèp ka'. Nyúè aè ghoèni weèe magoèr seê. Máè rïìñ buu bbebep ce beèe ce a ce loèr wap btu ená a woweèe Jus naè a ce laèa aèmboè weèe. Woweèe a yu Jus ka', a yu ba beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Sataèn.	"I know your works, oppression, and your poverty (but you are rich), and the blasphemy of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	10	Fa wáp neè ñgá' ce weèe be yá ka'. Yáê, Sataèn be moèoshi weèe. E be fa beèe mo' efa weèe mbe shañ tá a yá ñgá' mbo aè mnoèñ rúêú. Yi ka' ba ená weèe kwe njo' máè, weèe ku táá tatap tá m bo fa weèe rtaa ryoèñ.	Don't be afraid of the things which you are about to suffer. Behold, the devil is about to throw some of you into prison, that you may be tested; and you will have oppression for ten days. Be faithful to death, and I will give you the crown of life.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	11	Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá. Beèe ce a ka' táá tatap caa rmoèoshïì, baná rkwe embenjïì li be joèo woweèe ka'.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. He who overcomes won't be harmed by the second death.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	12	Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Págamoèm enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáè ce e túr saè' mbyáèráñ.	To the angel of the assembly in Pergamum write: ""He who has the sharp two-edged sword says these things:"
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe wááwá embe kansuèr a m roèo beèe tá a bo vúè táá njïìnsa' tá a koo Jisoès, yú. Geewa'a, a yá faèa ka'.	Now the chief priests and the whole council sought witnesses against Jesus to put him to death, and found none.
Ndì à bʉsi zhii ŋwàʼ, a ce seŋ buu.	Ndi has lost his book, and is wondering what to do.
Nyor e ke túr ñgúè' nyor moè'sir ka', e ke túr mñgúè' nyor jáá jáèá jáá.	For the body is not one member, but many.
ce e m kwe neè seèe. E m kwe neè seèe tá seèe woweèe bo cu aèbee aè nfeè' wááwá. E ka' vúê, káè seèe cu bteèe áè, káè seèe aè kweñger áè, tá seèe woweèe bo cu aèbee.	who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him.
A sañ buu ca tá weèe bo byemi ená Jisoès yu Kraêis, ce Muu Nyúè. Weèe aè ka' byemi wa'a, weèe bo koni ryoèñ a yeâ rlii.	but these are written, that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing you may have life in his name.
“Ñwáè ryá'nïì, Musïìs aè m laèa ená ñwáè aè ka' lor ñgwa, a ye a bi boo ka', ñgaèñ kwe, baná nfúr yïì be laasi ye, tá a ye a bi boo neè nfúr yïì ce e kwe anaè.	"saying, ""Teacher, Moses said, 'If a man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed for his brother.'"
Kuè cu neè ba mbe ndaèp anaè, ce ye ker ce no njáèá ká ce a ka' fa weèe, njobeè' yi yu yáánïì ená a la' ñwáè rfaè'. Weèe fa loè embe ndaèp moè' duè mbe moè' ka'.	Remain in that same house, eating and drinking the things they give, for the laborer is worthy of his wages. Don't go from house to house.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè rfúú ce beèe ce a kweñger a be keèe fúú efa rkwe, mboè weèe aè be be' yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa neè weèe a? E m laèa enáê,	But concerning the resurrection of the dead, haven't you read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
Yú' bebep yi ke fúú enjep ñwáè, kashi aè ñgoâñ yuur aè rroèo dïû' rlúèshïì. Yi ka' roo yá ka', yi laa enáê, ‘M be kúti mbe ndaèp ce máè m fúú embo naè.’	The unclean spirit, when he has gone out of the man, passes through dry places, seeking rest, and finding none, he says, 'I will turn back to my house from which I came out.'
AÈmboè Musïìs aè m naèa nyo ce a m toèo neè bco' mbekïì aè nfeè' woweèe a m ce jáèr aè rïìñ naè, a mboè a be kuè keè naèa Muu Ñwáè wa'a,	As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka', njobeè' beèe magoèr a be vúè a máâ rlii ce laèa enáê, ‘A máè Kraâis anaè,’ keèr laèa foñ enáê, ‘Nfeè' ce gháá.’ Weèe fa duè aèmbuèu woweèe ka'.	"He said, ""Watch out that you don't get led astray, for many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he,' and, 'The time is at hand.' Therefore don't follow them."
Fa fa yo cuèu njep mnsár ka'. Nsár yu yuu blúr ce vi ke vúè ba neè mlap.	But refuse foolish and ignorant questionings, knowing that they generate strife.
Faèdïì' ce yoè buu yu, a faèdïì' ce yo ntee yi yu foñ.	for where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
a laa ená beèe ce a ce koèñ aè rsa' mnsa' a Pol naè a vú yá wáè.] Wáè ka' bipshi buu neè ye, wá wáè foñ ku riñ yuu ce yi yu mini kuu buu ce weèr aè suñ wáè ená e geèe na.”	"By examining him yourself you may ascertain all these things of which we accuse him."""
Wèr à mʉ du wɛɛ mɛ̀ tʉʉ cʉ̀ʉ.	We went for a hunt and I shot a duiker.
Mɛ̀ koŋ rʉ̀ʉ yuu anà kaʼ.	I donʼt like the scent of that thing.
Seèe aè ka' ma'shi ená e ce gee njáèá buu ca, beèe wááwá a lo byemi neè ye, tá beâe aè to' Rum a lo vúè bepsi yiseèe dïû' rara ba yiseèe to'.”	"If we leave him alone like this, everyone will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and our nation."""
Máè laèa wa'a njobeè' beèe mo' ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka', a súèni a niñ a weâe mú, a ce gheèter aè rkupse nsuñ ce e yu aèmboè ntee boèñboñ ce Nyúè túr neè beèe naè, tá weèe bo byemi ená aè rgeèe bsaèrbuu yi yu yáánïì. Woweèe a geèe wa'a, a ce kani Jisos Kraâis ce ku ba ba ye caè'caè' ce e yu yïìseèe masaè, a ker ba Tata neè seèe. A m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè eluâuñgoèñ ená Nyúè be fa ñgá' neè njáèá beèe ca.	For there are certain men who crept in secretly, even those who were long ago written about for this condemnation: ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into indecency, and denying our only Master, God, and Lord, Jesus Christ.
Mmbomntaa Nyúè mi ka' caèa wáá, ce túè' be raa tá ba noèñ entombïì embe múè ñgaèa naè, aè ku bii aè mú ñgaèptú' seê, Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Máèári moè' caè, a du aè rfyá' rsheè.	Now after the Sabbath, as it began to dawn on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
M yu ñwáâ nteèe. Máè m kwe a kúti nteèe, cu nfeseè. Rkwe ker ba ñgoèñ byir a yu mba máâ mmboè.	and the Living one. I was dead, and behold, I am alive forevermore. Amen. I have the keys of Death and of Hades.
E natïì a du a woweèe aè rla' Nasaráèt, a cu a woweèe, a ce yu'ni neè woweèe. Yïì ma aè m láè buu ca wááwá njep yeâ ntee.	And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth. He was subject to them, and his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
M ce loo máná Nyúè mú' wee bfee tá weèe bo yá li rraa, rïìñ buu wááwá ce weèe aè láè mmir mbenduè mo njobeè' e m ká' weèe, ker riñ ená bti' ce Nyúè aè láè neè yïì beèe vi boèñ a caa ñger.	having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope of his calling, and what are the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints,
Beèe a ka' riñ njáèá ñwáè ce Nyúè yu, lo beesi njïì neè ye, njïì moè' ker ba aègho ce aède' ñwáè geêe, woweèe a beesïì yap ntee aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Woweèe a m yá rraa ce li m loè ese Nyúè, a riñ bghoènïì ce Nyúè aè fa woweèe, a koni Yú' Rara njep waâp mntee.	For concerning those who were once enlightened and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Spirit,
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená m be keèr no mruè' ce a geèe neè mbaèñ ce na ka', caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce m be no mïû mfi mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	"Most certainly I tell you, I will no more drink of the fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it anew in the Kingdom of God."""
A ka' laèa wa'a, Jisoès aè ma' ñgaèa neè woweèe enáê,	He told them this parable.
Muu ca aè m kuè' a túr ñger, a ker túr bfee foñ seê. Nyúè aè túr ye aè ntee boèñboñ.	The child was growing, and was becoming strong in spirit, being filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.
Woo bbyèŋge a bòŋ ndèe sê.	Your wives behave very well.
Ñgaèñ aè du a ce kar aè Mla' ce Rúêú, a ce suñ buu ce Jisoès aè m geèe neè ye. Beèe wááwá a bááñgeèr seê.	He went his way, and began to proclaim in Decapolis how Jesus had done great things for him, and everyone marveled.
E kòŋ mɛ̀ sê.	He loves me very much.
Yi ba foñ ená ñwáè ce a m bo' aè m ba Adaèm ka'. Ñwáè ce a m bo', e bú' ncir, aè m ba njeñwáè.	Adam wasn't deceived, but the woman, being deceived, has fallen into disobedience;
Fa kàa à rlii Nyʉ̀ kaʼ.	Do not swear by the name of God.
Mɛ̀ sɛpsi nè muu.	I spoke harshly to the child.
Beèe ce a m ce geèe ntaa a túr ku' buu se naè, a be yá aèmboè rla' ca li ce yá ñgá', wáp, táá aènjïìsaèp, taa mmbo mbe tuè, war, laèa enáê,	The merchants of these things, who were made rich by her, will stand far away for the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning;
M ce laèa mini aèmboè ñwáè Jisos Kraâis ená aède' ñwáè moè' ce aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè jepsïì máè faè dïì' m yu' nyor aè yuu ce máè geèe na ka'.	As the truth of Christ is in me, no one will stop me from this boasting in the regions of Achaia.
Waè' cena yi yu seè'ni ená seèe lor mncir aè yuu cicïì njo' rbyemïì a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Yi yu ba ená seèe tapsi mncir.	Do we then nullify the law through faith? May it never be! No, we establish the law.
Woweèe a byemi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ka' njobeè' Sataèn ce e yu nyúè enjep ñgoèñ na aè geèe woweèe a feêp. AÈde' woweèe a yá rraa ce li ce raa mbe waâp nduè ka'. Rraa ca yu rraa ce li vúè njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè foèo ce Kraâis túr ce e ku ba aèmboè Nyúè ye ye yu naè.	in whom the god of this world has blinded the minds of the unbelieving, that the light of the Good News of the glory of Christ, who is the image of God, should not dawn on them.
E kanïì, a laa neè ye enáê, “Duè fa wáâ laè' du suñ yoè beèe buu ce Tata aè koosimnse a gee neè wáè.”	"He didn't allow him, but said to him, ""Go to your house, to your friends, and tell them what great things the Lord has done for you, and how he had mercy on you."""
Woweèe a war a ká' mtuèu ba myáá a laa enáê, “Gweè neè mbe weâr nduè, cete weèr, faè dïì' ñwáè ce e cu mbe kaèbaèraè' yá weèr, tá Muu Njeèe bepsi ntee, fa weèr ñgá' aètu yeèr buu bbebep ka'.	"They told the mountains and the rocks, ""Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb,"
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Nyúè aè m láè mi mmbomntaa tá mi bo jaè' ñwáè, ke' ba ená ñwáè ba ñkwaèa neè mmbomntaa ka'.	"He said to them, ""The Sabbath was made for man, not man for the Sabbath."
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Yu ñwáè ce m be bá' bráâd cúè' njep njaèp fa neè ye.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a bá' bráâd a cú' njep njaèp, a fa neè Judaès, muu Saimún IÌskarïìyoèt.	"Jesus therefore answered, ""It is he to whom I will give this piece of bread when I have dipped it."" So when he had dipped the piece of bread, he gave it to Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot."
E a boo ndap, zhì tâa à saʼ.	He built a house and his father scattered it.
Yi ka' ba wa'a máè loo neè weèe ená weèe ku gee ba yuu ce m ce geèe.	I beg you therefore, be imitators of me.
Ñwáè ce e ce laèa enáê, “M rïìñ ye”, ke' ce geèe yuu ce e laèa ka' yu ñwáè nya' mnde', a buu mini.	"One who says, ""I know him,"" and doesn't keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth isn't in him."
Geewa'a, aède' mncir vi fa ñwáè ryoèñ ce nfeseè ka'. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená buu bbebep vi túr ñger mbenduè ñgoèñ ca wááwá. Baná yu ba beèe ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis naè, ce a be túr buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè beèe ce a byemi neè ye.	But the Scriptures imprisoned all things under sin, that the promise by faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
A ka' laèa wa'a, a lor Pitaè ba Jáêms, ker ba Joân, a woweèe a duê. E ká' a ce señ buu, mluè mi ce koo ye seê.	He took with him Peter, James, and John, and began to be greatly troubled and distressed.
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni aèmboè weèe aè rïìñ Nyúè na, káè seè'ni ce Nyúè aè rïìñ weèe na, weèe aè ker ce koèñ aè rkúti aèmbuèu byú' enjep ñgoèñ na njoká? Njáèá byú' anaè vi yu aè cicïì, a túr ñger ka'. Weèe ker ce koèñ aè rkúti ba bkwaèa neè byú' anaè njoká?	But now that you have come to know God, or rather to be known by God, why do you turn back again to the weak and miserable elemental principles, to which you desire to be in bondage all over again?
M ce laèa seè'ni na ba neè weèe ce weèe yu ye beèe enje jáá. M yu ñwáè ntuu ba neè beèe enje jáá. M ce loèr la rfaè' ca aè mcáâr ka',	For I speak to you who are Gentiles. Since then as I am an apostle to Gentiles, I glorify my ministry;
Ncïìndap Nyúè yïì entombïì a fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, a lor mghoèo ba mor ba bláá, a tarshi a ma' njep nsheè. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa nsheè aè sheê. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa bce aè she foñ, mjáá mi she wááwá.	The first sounded, and there followed hail and fire, mixed with blood, and they were thrown to the earth. One third of the earth was burnt up, and one third of the trees were burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè ndoñ ce a ke fyáp, ker ba rluñ ce a ke bu', ce mi túr myoèñ ka'. Ñwáè ka' fyáp ndoñ aè nji, káè bu' rluñ aè nji áè, aède' ñwáè riñ yuu ce e fyáp, káè yuu ce e bu' aè njáâá ká?	Even things without life, giving a voice, whether pipe or harp, if they didn't give a distinction in the sounds, how would it be known what is piped or harped?
Woweèe a m rïìñ njáèá njïì ce Nyúè e ke geèe beèe a ba byáánïì ka', a ce gheèter aè rroèo ba nduunjïì yap aè rba byáánïì, a kani yap yu njïì yïì Nyúè.	For being ignorant of God's righteousness, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they didn't subject themselves to the righteousness of God.
E ka' ker du bguèu a mbañruèñwáè moè' ce nduu yïì ku bii nteèe, baná e koo nduu ñwáè moè'. Nduu yi anaè aè ka' kwe baná e luèñ efa ncir. E ka' du bguèu a mbañruèñwáè moè' aè nfeè' anaè, baná e koo nduu ñwáè moè' ka'.	So then if, while the husband lives, she is joined to another man, she would be called an adulteress. But if the husband dies, she is free from the law, so that she is no adulteress, though she is joined to another man.
E ka' koo bráâd ca a ku fúú njepmbeè. AÈ m ba neètú'.	Therefore, having received that morsel, he went out immediately. It was night.
Jisoès aè m laèa ca neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, beèe wááwá a ce yu'.	In the hearing of all the people, he said to his disciples,
Jisoès aè ciisïì neè vi ená vi fa suñ ñwáè ená e yu Muu Nyúè ka'.	He sternly warned them that they should not make him known.
Lǒ embe dìʼ ce à tɛɛ anà.	Get away from where you are standing.
Pailáèt aè m ce koèñ aè rmaè'shi Jisoès, a ker laa yuu neè woweèe.	Then Pilate spoke to them again, wanting to release Jesus,
Woweèe a ceeshïì bco' ce keñ e ke táá aègho njep múè roè, vi suu njep roè, a ker ba'shi bkúè ce a ke kur yuu ce a ke doèo keñ aègho. Woweèe a ka' geèe wa' mïìsi, a naa ma cáâ' báèbár ce yi m ba kuè cuâu keñ tá fu' yi bo koo njo, doèo keñ duè aègho.	Casting off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time untying the rudder ropes. Hoisting up the foresail to the wind, they made for the beach.
Wèr e ke lɛ̀ kwâa ba mbe ndùŋ.	We usually keep our corn on the ceiling.
Ñgaâa ncïìñ njeèe a m kúti, a ce yoèñshi Nyúè, a ker ce kuè'si ye aè buu wááwá ce woweèe a m yu' a ker yá, njobeè' buu anaè aè m ku ba aèmboè ncïìndap Nyúè aè m suñ woweèe.	The shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all the things that they had heard and seen, just as it was told them.
Geewa'a, woweèe a m rïìñ yuu ce e m laèa anaè ka'. A m súèti mbuèu efa yuu ce e m laèa anaè ese woweèe faè dïì' woweèe a bo rïìñ yi ka'. Woweèe a wáp aè rbipshi yuu kuu yuu ce e m laèa anaè.	But they didn't understand this saying. It was concealed from them, that they should not perceive it, and they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
Muu zhì à mʉ yaŋ, e lo bkìlò a du mbà Lùʼ.	Her daughter was ill and she migrated and went to Luh.
A m seèesi yuu a kuu búè ba njo' beèe mo' ce a m ce bo'shi ená a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì. Beèe anaè a m la' kuèu a vú a weâr mú tá a bo yá ka njáèá njïì ce weèr ce geèe buu waèrwaèr njobeè' weèr Jisoès weèe yu aèbee naè. Woweèe a m koèñ ená mncir Jus vi kur weèr.	This was because of the false brothers secretly brought in, who stole in to spy out our liberty which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage;
E túr aè rba ñwáè ce beèe ce a yu ñgaâa cor ka' a be ce laèa yáánïì aèmboè ye foñ faè dïì' beèe a lo taèa ye, tá e kwe aè taa Sataèn ka'.	Moreover he must have good testimony from those who are outside, to avoid falling into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Misèe mgbaŋ mi yû?	Where is our salt?
njobeè' e láè noèñ ce a be sa' beèe wááwá aè njïû yáánïì, a ker ce ñwáè ce e be sa' beèe. Nyúè aè geèe ñwáè wááwá aè riñ ená e be geèe wa'a njobeè' e fúr ñwáè anaè efa rkwe.”	"because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead."""
Siŋ à jaʼ mbe tu ce.	The bird has perched at the tree top.
Weèe fa bu' ka'. Yuu yi ka' buu weèe, weèe loo yi ese Nyúè ker yoñshi ye aètu mo.	In nothing be anxious, but in everything, by prayer and petition with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God.
Nyúè aè m maè'shi ená nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep nsheè na, yoñse mbenduè blañ ca, fa ryoèñ aègho tá vi bo laèa. E m maè'shi ená blañ ca vi yúshi beèe ce a be gú'shi neè vi ka'.	It was given to him to give breath to it, to the image of the beast, that the image of the beast should both speak, and cause as many as wouldn't worship the image of the beast to be killed.
Beèe wááwá ce yaè Ta aè fa neè máè, a be vúè yá máè. Ñwáè ce e ka' vú yá máè, aède' m ke juu ñgaèñ ka',	All those who the Father gives me will come to me. Him who comes to me I will in no way throw out.
Mɛ̀ kupshi ntaʼ ca à njɛ̀ɛ enɛ̂.	I have made this chair like this.
Seèe táá tatap ba aè buu mini ce seèe aè yu' a byemi naè njobeè' seèe túr tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce e yu ñgoèr, ce e cu mbe buèu a táá a seâe btuè. Ñwáè tañshïû ñgoèr ca yu Jisoès ce e yu muu Nyúè.	Having then a great high priest, who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold tightly to our confession.
Mɛ̀ dù e banì a du ntaa.	I went when he had already gone to market.
Baná aèmboè Nyúè aè m ghoèni Abraèham njobeè' e m byemi neè ye naè, e be ghoèni beèe wááwá ce a byemi neè ye foñ.	So then, those who are of faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.
Jus anaè a laa enáê, “Yá neè aèmboè e m koèñ ye naè.”	"The Jews therefore said, ""See how much affection he had for him!"""
“Yá neè, Seèe ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, tá a du fa Muu Ñwáè mbaè mmbo beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir. Woweèe a be sa' ye, teni ená a yú ye,	"Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man will be delivered to the chief priests and scribes, and they will condemn him to death,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	19	keèr loèr ye fa ye mbaè mmbo beèe enje jáá tá woweèe a bo coosi ye, lïìp ye neè byáánsoè, taa ye mbe kïìntaa, mnoèñ vi ba btaar, e fúú efa rkwe.”	and will hand him over to the Gentiles to mock, to scourge, and to crucify; and the third day he will be raised up."
Yi yu boèñboñ ená ñwáè so ñwáè aè mbeèp yïì ba aètu yuu boèñboñ. Cena yu yuu yáánïì aè nfeè' wááwá, káè yu aè nfeè' m yu a weâe mú áè, káè m yu a weâe mú ka' áè.	But it is always good to be zealous in a good cause, and not only when I am present with you.
Nyaèa ce máè m yá anaè aè m feese mbaa. Mkuèu efa gho mi feeseè mkuèu njáèá nyaèa moè' ce a ke too ená báêá, cuèu efa gho yi ba aèmboè yïû búrúè' wa'a. Nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè aè fa nyaèa ca ñger ba kúú.	The beast which I saw was like a leopard, and his feet were like those of a bear, and his mouth like the mouth of a lion. The dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authority.
Baná vúè aègee kaèbaèraè' Nyúè, ke' ce tarni ka', yá ntee boèñboñ ce e túr neè seèe, njobeè' a mbe dïì' ce Nyúè be koosimnse neè seèe, jaè' seèe aè nfeè' ce yi yu ená e ba jaè' seèe.	Let us therefore draw near with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and may find grace for help in time of need.
Kò ntaʼ ca tɛr mbe ndàp.	Take this chair and keep in the house.
Yi yu tatap neè weèe aè rbyemi ená Nyúè e ke fúr beèe ce a kweñger efa rkwe njoká?	Why is it judged incredible with you, if God does raise the dead?
Ntaŋguu à kepti a ku bɛti ba à ŋgàŋŋgàr.	The stick got broken and remained but very little string.
Nyúè ce e m geèe ñgoèñ a ker gee buu enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá yu Nyúè ce e ce sa' mbe buèu ba njep nsheè. E ke cu mbe ndaèp Nyúè ce beèe a baè'ri neè mmbo ka'.	The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, doesn't dwell in temples made with hands,
Tata aè beesïì enáê, “Le rbyemïì li ba ba múcaèr se aèmboè ñgúè mostaè, weèe aè ba laèa neè ma ce ca enáê, ‘Co'ti embe na táá njep rdip rgoèr,’ tá yi ku yu'ni neè weèe.	"The Lord said, ""If you had faith like a grain of mustard seed, you would tell this sycamore tree, 'Be uprooted, and be planted in the sea,' and it would obey you."
Weèe lá ntee aè rkoni bfee ce vi be geèe tá weèe ja' cor goèr, caa bfee mo'. Baná m be suñ weèe yuu ce yi caèa buu ca wááwá seè'ni.	But earnestly desire the best gifts. Moreover, I show a most excellent way to you.
Woweèe a m borni efa rloo neè Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè foèo a ker ba Nyúè ce e ke kwe ka', a ce loo ba neè blañ ce a soèp vi feeseè ñwáè ce e ke loè ku kwe, ba bsiñ ba mnyaèa ker ba buu ce vi túr mnyoâr ka'.	and traded the glory of the incorruptible God for the likeness of an image of corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed animals, and creeping things.
Tá buu bbebep ce rla' ca li m geèe naè kúti mbe tu mo. Tá ñgá' ce a be fa neè rla' ca, caa yïì ce li m ce fa neè beèe naè ñkaèraè' baa. Loèr neè ndoñ ce rla' ca li m ce fa beèe mruè' njo ená a no naè fa li mruè' njo tá li no. Fa neè li ba mruè' ce mi tap a caa mruè' mi caè ñkaèraè' baa.	Return to her just as she returned, and repay her double as she did, and according to her works. In the cup which she mixed, mix to her double.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “A weèe beèe ce weèe ce duèñshi ená weèe yu beâe mini, geewa'a, Nyúè rïìñ yuu ce yi yu njep weâe mntee wááwá. Yuu ce beèe a loèr aè yuu goèr yu yuu ce Nyúè baèa.	"He said to them, ""You are those who justify yourselves in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts. For that which is exalted among men is an abomination in the sight of God."
Woweèe a waa, a laa enáê, “Muu Nyúè, yuu ce seèe túr a ká? Wáè vúè aèfa aè rfa weèr ñgá' tá nfeè' ka' keèe gháá a?”	"Behold, they cried out, saying, ""What do we have to do with you, Jesus, Son of God? Have you come here to torment us before the time?"""
Mor zhi bar a too muu.	The fire has sparked and burnt the child.
Jisoès aè ka' yá wa'a, nyoèr aè bep ye seê. E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Maè'shi tá boo anaè a vú yá máè, weèe fa jepsi woweèe ka', njobeè' kúú Nyúè yi yu ba neè beèe ce a yu aèmboè boo ca.	"But when Jesus saw it, he was moved with indignation, and said to them, ""Allow the little children to come to me! Don't forbid them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these."
E ka' yá wa'a, a laa mbekïì enáê, “Naèti, táá mbekïì.” Ñwáè anaè a nyáá mbekïì, a ká' a ce jáèr.	"said with a loud voice, ""Stand upright on your feet!"" He leaped up and walked."
Mbeŋ e ce gwè à yɛshì bkaŋ.	When it is raining place pans to collect water.
E ba koŋ enɛ m̀ fa gèe kaʼ, a ŋiʼ mɛ̀ nè lir.	He did not want me to do it, and winked at me.
beèe a mmbaa ca a suñ yuu ce yi m koni woweèe aè nduunjïì, a ker suñ aèmboè woweèe a m rïìñ ye aè nfeè' ce e m bá'shi bráâd a fa neè woweèe naè.	They related the things that happened along the way, and how he was recognized by them in the breaking of the bread.
Zhi tap à rbèʼ nfèʼ ce rkar mutù rli ce bèeŋger.	It is difficult to count the number of times the wheel of a car is turning.
Jisoès aè kútïì aè ñgoâñ Galeèle neè ñger Yú' Rara. Nsuñ aèmboè ye aè duè aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoèñ anaè.	Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee, and news about him spread through all the surrounding area.
Nfeè' ce Muu Ñwáè be vúè, be ba aèmboè nfeè' yïì Nowa aè m ba naè.	"As the days of Noah were, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	38	Tá nfeè' ce mbeèñ aè m gweè mdip mi ruu a cete ñgoèñ naè ka' gháá, beèe a m ce ye buu, a ce no buu, bbyeèñge a ce duè bguèu, mmbañruè a ce loèr bbyeèñge, a ku ce geèe wa'a caar a ba' nyúè ce Nowa aè m niñ mbe keñ ñgoèr.	For as in those days which were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	39	Woweèe a riñ yuu ce yi be koni ka', caar mdip mi ruu aè ñgoèñ, a yúshi woweèe wááwá. A mboè yi be ba wa'a, aè nfeè' ce Muu Ñwáè ce vúè.	and they didn't know until the flood came, and took them all away, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	40	Mmbañruè aè baa a be ba aè mñkúè, tá a lor moè', maè'shi moè'.	Then two men will be in the field: one will be taken and one will be left;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	41	Bbyeèñge a baa a be ce goè' baa, tá a lor moè', maè'shi moè'.	two women grinding at the mill, one will be taken and one will be left.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	42	Baná weèe ce ke'ni wee btu njobeè' weèe rïìñ noèñ ce yeè Tata be vúè ka'.	Watch therefore, for you don't know in what hour your Lord comes.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	43	Rïìñ neè ená ñwáè ndap aè ka' ba riñ nfeè' ce nyáèá be vúè neètú' yáèá yïì buu, e ba ce keè'se, keè' maè'shi tá nyáèá kep yïì ndap ka'.	But know this, that if the master of the house had known in what watch of the night the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	44	Baná wee weèe aè ba tami nyor njobeè' Muu Ñwáè be vúè aè nfeè' ce weèe ce kwaè'shi ená e be vúè ka'.	Therefore also be ready, for in an hour that you don't expect, the Son of Man will come.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	45	“Ñwáè rfaè' ce e yu ñwáâ mini, a ba ñwáè bfee foñ yu nda? Mboè yu ñwáè ce yïì masaè be láè yïì ndap ená e ce fyá', ce fa byee neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' mo' njep nfeè' a?	Who then is the faithful and wise servant, whom his lord has set over his household, to give them their food in due season?"
Njeñwáè ce e m ba ñkúú embaè mbuèu ñgoèñ, be keè naèti táá aè noèñ mnsa', laèa ená ñgúè beèe yïû seè'ni na aè geèe yuu bebep njobeè' e m vúè yi ba aè njïìsaèp seê, aè ryu' blaèa bfee ce Solomúèn aè m ce laèa. Yá neè! Yuu mo' yi yu mbena seè'ni ce yi caèa Solomúèn.	The Queen of the South will rise up in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them: for she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and behold, one greater than Solomon is here.
A m ce loè kur ye mkoo ba mkuèu neè bkwaèñ, e ku ceeshi. Ñwáè moè' aè ker túr ñger aè rkoo ye kur ka'.	because he had been often bound with fetters and chains, and the chains had been torn apart by him, and the fetters broken in pieces. Nobody had the strength to tame him.
Ka' cu, ñgoèñ yi ci'tïì tatap seê, ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè suu embe buèu, a biñsi luèr embe ncuèu rsheè, a cu mbenduè mo.	Behold, there was a great earthquake, for an angel of the Lord descended from the sky, and came and rolled away the stone from the door, and sat on it.
“Ñwáè ce e ka' riñ aè rfyá' aè yuu ce yi yu múcaèr neè mini-ñwáè, baná aède' e fyá' aè yïû goèr neè mini-ñwáè foñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' riñ aè rfyá' aè yuu ce yi yu múcaèr ka', baná aède' e riñ aè rfyá' aè yïû goèr foñ ka'.	He who is faithful in a very little is faithful also in much. He who is dishonest in a very little is also dishonest in much.
Woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rkoo ye mbe keñ. A ka' keè', a ku yá ená woweèe a baè' neèñguu túè faèdïì' woweèe a m ce duè.	They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat. Immediately the boat was at the land where they were going.
Ñwáè aè ka' ce tarni aè rye njáèá byee mo', kúti ye byee anaè, baná Nyúè be taèa ye njobeè' e ce ye byee anaè wa'a, a byemi ená yi yu yáánïì neè ye aè rye ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' ce geèe yuu ce e byemi ená yi yu yáánïì ka', baná ñwáè anaè aè geèe yuu bebep.	But he who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it isn't of faith; and whatever is not of faith is sin.
Ñwáè msaèasïì moè' aè m vúè a yá Jisoès, a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a loo ye, a laa enáê, “Wáè ka' koêñ, aè gee m ke'seè, ba nrara.”	"A leper came to him, begging him, kneeling down to him, and saying to him, ""If you want to, you can make me clean."""
Jisoès aè ka' rïìñ ená a ce cu mcúè tá a bo yú ye, a loâ aèfo. Beèe magoèr a m duè a yeâ mbuèu, e gee beèe wááwá ce a m ce yañ a ke'seè.	Jesus, perceiving that, withdrew from there. Great multitudes followed him; and he healed them all,
Buu wááwá aè geèe Nyúè, aè ba yïì buu. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e m roèo ená beèe magoèr a koni fáñ aè rba boo vi, sa' foèo, yi m ba yáánïì ená e gee tá ñwáè ce e be múè' njïì naè yá ñgá', ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' e gee woweèe a luêñ.	For it became him, for whom are all things, and through whom are all things, in bringing many children to glory, to make the author of their salvation perfect through sufferings.
Pailáèt aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Baná m be geèe má ká neè Jisoès ce a too ená Kraâis na?” Woweèe wááwá a beesïì enáê, “Taa yi mbe kïìntaa.”	"Pilate said to them, ""What then shall I do to Jesus, who is called Christ?"" They all said to him, ""Let him be crucified!"""
E m gweè njeptii Jisoès a yoñshi ye. Ñwáè anaè aè m ba ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè.	He fell on his face at Jesus' feet, giving him thanks; and he was a Samaritan.
Woweèe a m ku cu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá a ce yoèñshi Nyúè.	and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Amen.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá mbe buèu. A ka' fyá' mbo, dïû' rara ce yi caèa ñger ce yi yu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè embe buèu naè yi ba too.	After these things I looked, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, Jisoès aè vú a yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	When it was evening he came with the twelve.
E ka' kwaè'shi wa' wáá a ker laa enáê, ‘A yuu ce m be geèe na. M be saè'si wa bcaèñ, sáá vïû bgoèrgoèr, láè yaè kwaa ba yaè buu njo.	He said, 'This is what I will do. I will pull down my barns, and build bigger ones, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
njobeè' woweèe a m be riñ aèmboè Jisoès aè m geèe, a ka' nyañ ku' beèe ca neè bráâd taê, ba nca baa ka'.	for they hadn't understood about the loaves, but their hearts were hardened.
E fèʼshi a lʉsi nè rloo.	He preached and concluded with a prayer.
Maataè aè m láè ntee ba aè rfáèr byee. E vú a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Tataê, nfúraè aè maè'shi mfaè' wááwá ba mbe máâ mmboè, wáè ke' ce loèr aè yuu ka' a? Laèa neè ye ená e vú ja' máè.”	"But Martha was distracted with much serving, and she came up to him, and said, ""Lord, don't you care that my sister left me to serve alone? Ask her therefore to help me."""
Jus a ka' yu' blaèa ca, a kwá' bluèr tá a bo túúshi ye aègho tá e kwe.	Therefore Jews took up stones again to stone him.
Ñgá' ce weèr ce yá, ce e be cu njïìsaèp ka' naè, yu aèmboè yuu ce yi fáp wa'a, a ce geèe tá seèe bo ghááte aè rkoni foèo ce yi be cu nfeseè. Foèo anaè yi caèa ñgá' anaè goèr seê.	For our light affliction, which is for the moment, works for us more and more exceedingly an eternal weight of glory;
A ka' vú efa ntaa, a ku su'si mmbo wáá ka' ye yuu. Woweèe a ker túr ndeèe moè' foñ ce waêp bta a m kwe, a lá neè woweèe, aèmboè aède' woweèe a su'sïì mndoñ ba mkïìñ, ker ba bkañ aè njïû yáánïì.	They don't eat when they come from the marketplace, unless they bathe themselves, and there are many other things, which they have received to hold to: washings of cups, pitchers, bronze vessels, and couches.)
Malaʼ à dù bgùu mbà Tàakù a Ndì.	Malah has married at Taku to Ndi.
Geewa'a, beèe magoèr ce a m yu' yuu ce woweèe a m laèa a m byemi. Beèe ce a m byemi a m baè' seè'ni aèmboè ncúèkïì ta wa'a.	But many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men came to be about five thousand.
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ gee yuu bebep nè mɛ̀ banɛ m̀ be fòosi ye.	If someone does evil to me, therefore I will forgive him.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa keèr de'ñger ka'.	"Therefore Jesus answered them, ""Don't murmur among yourselves."
Yu'ni neè neè beèe ce a yu kuèntombïì neè weèe, gee yuu ce a ce laèa neè weèe. Woweèe a ce keè'ni me myoèñ, a ker ba foñ beèe ce a be keè táá aè bsii Nyúè, suñ aèmboè a m geèe rfaè' ca aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ba njep ñgoèñ na. Seèe yu'ni neè woweèe tá woweèe a bo ce geèe lap rfaè' neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè, buwa'laèr woweèe a lo ce koosimnse, tá yuu anaè yi ja' weèe ka'.	Obey your leaders and submit to them, for they watch on behalf of your souls, as those who will give account, that they may do this with joy, and not with groaning, for that would be unprofitable for you.
Beèe wááwá embe kansuèr a ka' fyá' bsii Stáfaèn, a yá vi ba aèmboè bsii ncïìndap Nyúè wa'a.	All who sat in the council, fastening their eyes on him, saw his face like it was the face of an angel.
Woweèe a du mbe dïì' mo' ce a m ce too ená Gáètsámanïì. A ka' baè' mbo, Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Cu neè mbena tá m gee rloo.”	"They came to a place which was named Gethsemane. He said to his disciples, ""Sit here, while I pray."""
Wɛ̀ vʉ̀ mʉcòŋ a?	Have you come for no bad reason?
E laa enáê, “Duè neè, muunje ca aè kwe kwe ka', e ce buumi buumi.” E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a vúshïì ye.	"he said to them, ""Make room, because the girl isn't dead, but sleeping."" They were ridiculing him."
Jus ce a woweèe a m ce cu rkwe mbe ndaèp naè a ka' yá aèmboè Máèári aè saè'ti a fúú njepmbeè, woweèe a du a yeâ mbuèu njobeè' a m ce kwaè' ená e ce duè aè rwar rkwe faèdïì' rsheè li m ba.	"Then the Jews who were with her in the house, and were consoling her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying, ""She is going to the tomb to weep there."""
A mboè rbyemïì li ku ba wa'a. Ñwáè aè ka' byemi, ke' ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ ka' baná rbyemïì anaè li yu gúâú yuu.	Even so faith, if it has no works, is dead in itself.
AÈ yu ñwáè rboâñtu njobeè' wáè byemi ená yuu ce Tata aè laèa neè wáè yi be kuè ba aèmboè e laèa.”	"Blessed is she who believed, for there will be a fulfillment of the things which have been spoken to her from the Lord!"""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ca ma Jisoès ba bfúr vi a vú a tááte njep ncúèúndúè', a ce ká' ye.	His mother and his brothers came, and standing outside, they sent to him, calling him.
Ka' cu, mmbañruè mo' beèe a mmbaa ce a m ba mnfeèp a cu aèwaâa nduunjïì. A ka' yu' ená Jisoès ce caèa, woweèe a waa, a laa enáê, “Tataê, Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè weèr.”	"Behold, two blind men sitting by the road, when they heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, ""Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!"""
M ce suñ weèe máná m be keèr ye ñkaè' ca ka', caar tá yuu ce ñkaè' ca yi táá aètu mo yi ke ghááte mbe rla' Nyúè embe buèu.”	"for I tell you, I will no longer by any means eat of it until it is fulfilled in the Kingdom of God."""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Mboè weèe ce yá ndap ca a? M ce suñ weèe neè mini- ñwáè ená luèr moè' be cu nje Ndap Nyúè ca ka'. A be káèáshi vi wááwá.”	"But he answered them, ""You see all of these things, don't you? Most certainly I tell you, there will not be left here one stone on another, that will not be thrown down."""
Pol aè ka' baè' aè rla' Milátoès, a cep ntuu ená btu embe cor aè rla' Áfásoès a vú yá ye.	From Miletus he sent to Ephesus, and called to himself the elders of the assembly.
Bfúr waê, m ku ba ñwáè rkwe aè nfeè' wááwá. Máè laèa wa'a njo' naèatu ce m ce naèa neè weèe njobeè' seèe yu aèbee seèe Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê.	I affirm, by the boasting in you which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
njobeè' Tata Nyúè ce keè'ni beèe ce a ce geèe buu byáánïì, a ce yu' lap rloo, a ce fa ñgá' neè beèe ce a ce geèe buu bbebep.”	"For the eyes of the Lord are on the righteous, and his ears open to their prayer; but the face of the Lord is against those who do evil."""
Tu bsoogáè yïû goèr ca aè m koo Poêl, a laa ená a kur ye neè bshañ bbaa, a bipshi neè beèe ená Pol yu nda lá, a ker bipshi ená e geèe ba ká lá?	Then the commanding officer came near, arrested him, commanded him to be bound with two chains, and inquired who he was and what he had done.
Yá aèmboè Nyúè yu ñwáâ ñgoèr naè! Yá aèmboè e rïìñ buu, a túr bfee se naè! AÈde' ñwáè riñ aèmboè Nyúè ce kwaè'shi ka'. AÈde' ñwáè riñ aèmboè Nyúè ce geèe yïì buu ka'.	Oh the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past tracing out!
Taèr koèñ Muu, a ce duèñshi ye buu wááwá ce e ke geèe. E be duèñshi ye buu bghagha' ce e be geèe ce vi be caèa vïì ce weèe aè yá na, tá weèe yá, báèáñger seê.	For the Father has affection for the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does. He will show him greater works than these, that you may marvel.
Máèlkisidáèk ca aè m ba ñkúú aè to' Saláèm, a ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè embe buèu. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' Abraèham aè ka' duè maè' bïìr a bkúú mo', a so woweèe. A ka' ce kúti, Máèlkisidáèk aè du a koni ye a ghoni ye.	For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him,
M rïìñ máná a m loèr mbañruèñwáè anaè a du aègho aè ñgoâñ Paraèdaêis. Káè e m duè neè yïì nyor áè, ká e m duè aègho ka' áè, m rïìñ ka'. Ñwáè ce e rïìñ ku ba Nyúè caè'caè'.	I know such a man (whether in the body, or outside of the body, I don't know; God knows),
Kwaè'shi ba aèmboè Jisoès ce e m byemi, a yá ñgá' mbaè mmbo beâe bbebep ce a m baèa ye, faè dïì' weèe lo koosi bsáè tá ntee yi lo kwe weèe ka'.	For consider him who has endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, that you don't grow weary, fainting in your souls.
Ñwáè Farïìsi moè' ce a m ce too ená Gaèmalïìyaèl, aè m naèti mbekïì. AÈ m ba ñwáè ce e m ce yá'ni beèe mncir Nyúè, aè ba ñwáè ce beèe wááwá a m ce yu'ni neè ye. E m laèa ená a fúr beèe ca njepmbeè tá a cu njo nfeè' múcaèr.	But one stood up in the council, a Pharisee named Gamaliel, a teacher of the law, honored by all the people, and commanded to put the apostles out for a little while.
Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, “Ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' byemi neè ye, baná e be coosi ñgaèñ ka'.”	"For the Scripture says, ""Whoever believes in him will not be disappointed."""
E m loèr mú ghaèrñwáè a tár mbe waâp mú, a koo ye nje nyoèr, a laa enáê,	He took a little child, and set him in the midst of them. Taking him in his arms, he said to them,
Nyúè aè m lapni ye njo' yuu bebep ce e m koèñ aè rgeèe anaè. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, jaèaki' ce e ke laèa ka', aè laa aèmboè ñwáè wa'a, a gee ñwáè ntuu Nyúè ca aè ke' gee yuu ce yi m ba neè blúr-ñwáè ka'.	but he was rebuked for his own disobedience. A mute donkey spoke with a man's voice and stopped the madness of the prophet.
A ke làa yuu à lo bàp.	When something is said, act quickly.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' e laa enáê, “Nyúè, m be suñ bfúr wa aèmboè njáèá ñwáè ce aè yu; m be táá aè múè yoè beèe, yoèp yáá, náèsi wáè.”	"saying, ""I will declare your name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will sing your praise."""
Nyaèa ce e m ba nteèe, a bii nteèe seè'ni ka' naè yu ñkúú embenjïì bkúú saèambaê. E yu ñkúú embenjïì bkúú saèamba wa'a, a ku ba aè múè bkúú saèamba ca. Ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá e nati du faèdïì' ce a be yú ye tá e kwe dúèdúè.	The beast that was, and is not, is himself also an eighth, and is of the seven; and he goes to destruction.
M ka' du ba' fa mbaèa ce a kuèu anaè neè woweèe, misi rfaè' anaè, tá m lá' caè'ni weèe ka' caèa duè aè to' Spáên.	When therefore I have accomplished this, and have sealed to them this fruit, I will go on by way of you to Spain.
Woweèe a ka' vúè baè', Pol aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe rïìñ njáèá njïì ce máè m cu a weâe mú káâ' aè noèñ ce máè m tár kuèu aè ñgoâñ Áshaè.	"When they had come to him, he said to them, ""You yourselves know, from the first day that I set foot in Asia, how I was with you all the time,"
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Yá buu, lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè, wáè ke'seè.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Receive your sight. Your faith has healed you."""
Pitaè aè fúú a du a yeâ mbuèu a ke' riñ ená yuu ce ncïìndap Nyúè aè m geèe anaè yi m ba mini ka'. E m kwaè'shi ená e ku yá yá.	And he went out and followed him. He didn't know that what was being done by the angel was real, but thought he saw a vision.
Joân aè m yar bcáè' ce a m ba' neè mnyoâr Kaèmáêl, a cúú ñguèp nyaèa njep mbuèu. Vi byee aè m ba mñguu ba bluè.	Now John himself wore clothing made of camel's hair, with a leather belt around his waist. His food was locusts and wild honey.
Nyúè aè m ka' tá koosimnse efa rfaèrshi mmba' ce mo' efa ce Oleèf yïû aè mñkúè ka', baná e be koosimnse efa rfaèrshi weèe foñ ka'.	for if God didn't spare the natural branches, neither will he spare you.
Bbyeèñge foñ a túr aè rba ba beèe ce a ce loèr buu aètáèr ka', ba ñgaâa mnsa'ni foñ ka'. A túr aè rba beèe ce a túr ntee bobor, ba foñ beèe ce a yu mini aè buu wááwá.	Their wives in the same way must be reverent, not slanderers, temperate, faithful in all things.
Woweèe a ka' suñ beèe aèmboè Jisoès, keèr feè'shi blaèa Tataê, a nati a kúti Jáèrusaláèm. Woweèe a ka' ce kúti a fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca aè ku' mla' magoèr aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè.	They therefore, when they had testified and spoken the word of the Lord, returned to Jerusalem, and preached the Good News to many villages of the Samaritans.
Kuè táá ba njep blaâa mini aèmboè Jisos Kraâis ce wáè m yu' ese máè naè. Geèe tá lo rbyemïì ba rkoèñ ce wáè koèñ beèe njo' Jisos Kraâis naè li yááti.	Hold the pattern of sound words which you have heard from me, in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
Bsoogáè a m ku gee aèmboè a m laèa neè woweèe, a lor Pol neètú', a du aègho a ba' aè rla' AÈntipaètidaè.	So the soldiers, carrying out their orders, took Paul and brought him by night to Antipatris.
“beèe a mmbaa a m duè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè rgeèe rloo, moè' aè ba ñwáè Farïìsïî, moè' aè ba ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè'.	"Two men went up into the temple to pray; one was a Pharisee, and the other was a tax collector.
Luke	Luêk	18	11	Ñwáè Farïìsi aè táá, a loo neè yïì nyor, a laa enáê, ‘Nyúè, m ce yoèñshi wáè njobeè' m yu aèmboè beèe mo' ka'. M yu ñwer ka', a ba ñwáè nfïìp ka', a ce koo bbyeèñge beèe ka'. M ce yoèñshi wáè ená m yu aèmboè ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ca ka'.	The Pharisee stood and prayed to himself like this: 'God, I thank you, that I am not like the rest of men, extortioners, unrighteous, adulterers, or even like this tax collector.
Luke	Luêk	18	12	Máâ ke jïì mdip nfeè' baa njep ñgaèa, ce geèe rloo, ce fa ñgúè' moè'sir efa rúú efa yaè buu wááwá.’	I fast twice a week. I give tithes of all that I get.'
Luke	Luêk	18	13	Ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' aè táá yi yu encaèñ, a naa yi yu mi mmir a ke' mbe buèu ka'. E m la' mi mbo mbe yeâ ntee a laa enáê, ‘Nyúè, koosimnse neè máè ce m yu ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep.’	But the tax collector, standing far away, wouldn't even lift up his eyes to heaven, but beat his breast, saying, 'God, be merciful to me, a sinner!'
Luke	Luêk	18	14	M ce suñ weèe ená ñwáè ce e m duè mbe yeâ ndaèp a ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè aè m ba ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', aè ke' ba ñwáè Farïìsi ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' naa yïì nyor mbekïì baná a be suèusi ye njep nsheè. Ñwáè ce e ka' suusi yïì nyor njep nsheè baná a be naèa ye mbekïì.”	I tell you, this man went down to his house justified rather than the other; for everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, but he who humbles himself will be exalted."
Muu ca à yàŋse a tɛɛ tàʼtàʼsê.	This child has learned how to stand very early.
Tá beèe a ku'si Nyúè aè nfeè' bsïìp. Yi yu wa'a.	to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
M ̀ tʉr mbàʼ ntʉʉ rtaa kaʼ.	I donʼt have thread to knit a cap.
Ku ba Nyúè ce e fa ncir, a ker túr ñger aè rsa' beèe, ku ba ye ce e túr ñger aè rjaè' beèe, a ker túr ñger aè rbepsi beèe. A wáè nda, ka' ce sa' bfúr wo?	Only one is the lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy. But who are you to judge another?
Ñwáè ce e m koo ncúèkïì moè'sir naè aè vú foñ, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, máè m rïìñ máná aè yu ñwáâ ntatap seê. Wáâ ke kep yuu ce wáè m byeè ka', kap yuu ce wáè m ñwañ ka'.	"He also who had received the one talent came and said, 'Lord, I knew you that you are a hard man, reaping where you did not sow, and gathering where you did not scatter.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	25	Máè m wáp, a du a tuñ beè'teè a súti yo mbaèa njo. Yáê, a yo mbaèa na.’	I was afraid, and went away and hid your talent in the earth. Behold, you have what is yours.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	26	Yïì masaè aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘AÈ yu ñwáè rfaâ' mbembep, a ba mbor. Wáè m rïìñ wáná máâ ke kep yuu ce máè m byeè ka', kap yuu ce máè m ñwañ ka'.	But his lord answered him, 'You wicked and slothful servant. You knew that I reap where I didn't sow, and gather where I didn't scatter."
E vʉ̀ a suŋ wèr nè zhii cùu.	He came and told us himself.
M ce bipshi máná woweèe a m yu' nsuñ ca ka' lá? Yi yu mini wa' ka'. Yi yu enáê, “Beèe a yu' yaèp njeèndoñ aè bdïì' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ. Wap blaèa vi baè' aè mmbuu ñgoèñ wááwá.”	"But I say, didn't they hear? Yes, most certainly, ""Their sound went out into all the earth, their words to the ends of the world."""
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè vúê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Máè caè'ni wáè! Tata yu weèe ye, aè túr rboâñtu weèe Nyúè!”	"Having come in, the angel said to her, ""Rejoice, you highly favored one! The Lord is with you. Blessed are you among women!"""
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a máñni Jisoès, m túr ñger mo' aè rsa' woweèe ka'. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e ke sa' njáèá beèe ca. Yu ba yiseèe dïì' aè rsa' ñgaâa coêr, yá ená woweèe a geèe boèñboñ káè bebep lá. Yaè beèe, baná weèe gee aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Fúr neè ñwáâ mbembep efa weâe mú.” Máè túr yuu aè rlaèa aèmboè mnsa' ce weâe duè aègho mbe koêr.	"For what have I to do with also judging those who are outside? Don't you judge those who are within? But those who are outside, God judges. ""Put away the wicked man from among yourselves."""
Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Máèári moè' caè, a m cu aè ncuâu rsheè.	Mary Magdalene was there, and the other Mary, sitting opposite the tomb.
Ñwáè aè luèu ntaa a caa njeèe. Baná ncir yi byemi ená ñwáè gee yuu boèñboñ nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè.”	"Of how much more value then is a man than a sheep! Therefore it is lawful to do good on the Sabbath day."""
E ka' yu' ená Lasoèroès ce yañ, a ker cu faèdïì' ce e m ba naè aè mnoâñ bbaa.	When therefore he heard that he was sick, he stayed two days in the place where he was.
Ma yïì Jisoès, ba nfúr yïì maê, ba Máèári ce e m ba ñgwa Kïìlopaès ba Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè, a m táá aègee kïìntaa Jisoès.	But there were standing by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas, and Mary Magdalene.
AÈnaèniyaès aè ka' yu', a gwe aè nsheè a kwe. Beèe ce a m yu' yuu ce yi m koni anaè, a m wáp seê.	Ananias, hearing these words, fell down and died. Great fear came on all who heard these things.
E beesïì enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Ñwáè e ke cu nteèe ba njo' bráâd caè'caè' ka'. E ke cu ba njo' blaèa ce vi ke fúú ekuèèèè cuâu Nyúè.’ ”	"But he answered, ""It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.'"""
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m káè' a ce sár mnsár ená ñwáè efa waâp mú ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr a nda lá.	There arose an argument among them about which of them was the greatest.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè beèe ce a m ce aè btu embe cor naè, woweèe a m ker kyese yuu mo' mbenduè blaèa ce máè m ce feè'shi ka'. Ka' beèe ca a m ba btu wa'a, máè m loèr yap nta' anaè aè yuu goèr ka', njobeè' beèe wááwá a yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	But from those who were reputed to be important (whatever they were, it makes no difference to me; God doesn't show partiality to man)--they, I say, who were respected imparted nothing to me,
Jisoès aè fyá' ñgoèñ, a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Yi yu tatap se neè ñgaâa mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	"Jesus looked around, and said to his disciples, ""How difficult it is for those who have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!"""
Bfúr waê, weèe fa ce laèa bebep kuu beèe mo' ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce laèa bebep kuu nfúr yïì, ker ce sa' ye, baná e ce laèa bebep kuu ncir, a ker ce sa' ba yi. Weèe aè ka' ce sa' ncir baná weèe aè borni aè rláè ncir, a ká' a ce sa' yi sa'.	Don't speak against one another, brothers. He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother, speaks against the law and judges the law. But if you judge the law, you are not a doer of the law, but a judge.
Weèe aè m ba riñ mbuèu efa blaèa ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, ‘Yuu ce m ce koèñ yu ñkoosimnse, ke' ba tañshïì ka'’ naè, weèe aè m ba laèa weená ñwáè ce e geèe yuu bebep ka' yu ñwáè mbembep ka'.	But if you had known what this means, 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' you would not have condemned the guiltless.
Pol aè baashïì ñguu a byá' mbe rkoo, a ka' ce toèo, nyo aè fúú enjo njobeè' mor yi m luèu goèr, a luu ye aè boè, a barni aègho.	But when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks and laid them on the fire, a viper came out because of the heat, and fastened on his hand.
Ñwáè ka' laa yuu ba aè yi ñger, baná ñgaèñ ce roèo ená beèe a ku'si ba ye. Ñwáè aè ka' ce roèo ená beèe a ku'si ba ñwáè ce e tuu ye, seèe riñ seená ñgaèñ yu ñwáè mini, a túr faèa ka'.	He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him is true, and no unrighteousness is in him.
Nsuñ ce weèr aè yu' ese ye, a ce suñ weèe, yu ená Nyúè yu rraa, túè'nji yu njep ye ka',	This is the message which we have heard from him and announce to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
Beèe mo' a vú neè ñwáè moè' ce yïì ñgúè' nyor moè' aè m kwe, e noñ mbe keèñ. Jisoès aè ka' yá lap rbyemïì, a laa neè ñwáè ce yïì ñgúè' nyor moè' aè m kwe naè enáê, “Kur ntee muu waè, máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep.”	"Behold, they brought to him a man who was paralyzed, lying on a bed. Jesus, seeing their faith, said to the paralytic, ""Son, cheer up! Your sins are forgiven you."""
Wɛ̀ ba ce dù.	You ought to be going.
Jisoès aè ka' ce duè rjáèr, ñwáè moè' aè cañ a vú a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïû mboèñmboñ, yuu ce aède' m gee ka' koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè a ká?”	"As he was going out into the way, one ran to him, knelt before him, and asked him, ""Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?"""
Ncïìndap Nyúè embenjïì mo aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, máè yu' njeèndoñ aèmboè e vúâ aè mmbur kyeèe embe dïì' rfa ce a m geèe neè guêl, yi táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè naè.	The sixth angel sounded. I heard a voice from the horns of the golden altar which is before God,
E ka' duè múcaèr, a ker yá Jáêms, ba Joân ce a m ba boo Sábáèdi mbe keñ, a ce túúshi map mraa. E ká' woweèe.	Going on a little further from there, he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John, his brother, who were also in the boat mending the nets.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèr aè ke' ce láè mer mmir ba mbenduè buu ce beèe a ce yá neè mmir ka'. Weèr aè láè mer mmir ba mbenduè buu ce aède' ñwáè yá ka', njobeè' buu ce aède' ñwáè yá, vi be cu nfeseè ka'. Vïì ce vi be cu nfeseè yu vïì ce aède' ñwáè yá ka' naè.	while we don't look at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are eternal.
M ce kwaè'shi máná m ka vúê, seèe cu aè mú nfeè' moè', seemoè' aède' seèe ku cu nfeè' kïìntoèo mïî. E mïì wáá, weèe ja' máè m du faèdïì' m koèñ aè rduè.	But with you it may be that I will stay, or even winter, that you may send me on my journey wherever I go.
Weèe aè ka' ce luuni aèmboè mnyaèa, baná weèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' weèe yúshi wee btu ka'.	But if you bite and devour one another, be careful that you don't consume one another.
Buu bbebep beèe moè' vi ke yaèñse yááti, beèe aè riñ ená woweèe a be gweè mnsa'. Buu bbebep vi beèe moè' vi loè lor nfeè' seê, ka' yááti.	Some men's sins are evident, preceding them to judgment, and some also follow later.
Jisos Kraâis aè vúè wáá aè tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a vú neè bghoènïì a fa neè seèe. E ce geèe li rfaè' ba mbe dïì' ce yi boèñ a caa dïû' rara ca njobeè' dïì' anaè yi yu yáánïì seê. Dïì' anaè aè m geèe ñwáè ka', baná yu yuu enjep ñgoèñ na ka'.	But Christ having come as a high priest of the coming good things, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this creation,
Ñwáè ca be coosi wáè ce wáè geèe búè, a riñ mncir Nyúè ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè, a lá vi ka' naè.	Won't the uncircumcision which is by nature, if it fulfills the law, judge you, who with the letter and circumcision are a transgressor of the law?
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr aè be koo mñwaè' moâ' aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ce a sañ a kuu wáè ka'. Nfúr yïìseèe moè' aè be vúâ aèfo neè nsuñ moâ' mbembep káè a laa yuu bebep mo' kuu wáè ka'.	"They said to him, ""We neither received letters from Judea concerning you, nor did any of the brothers come here and report or speak any evil of you."
Weèr ce cïìisi a ker ce bu' mmbo neè beèe anaè aè rlii Tata Jisoès Kraâis ená woweèe a cu aè nsheè ce fa' tá a bo túr yuu ye.	Now those who are that way, we command and exhort in the Lord Jesus Christ, that with quietness they work, and eat their own bread.
Njɛ̀ɛ rmòoshɨ ce satàn à m̀ mòoshi Jesus nà, rli tap sê.	The kind of temptation that Satan tested Jesus with was very strong.
Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Fïìlaèdálfïìyaè enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáâ nrara, a ker ba ñwáè mini. E túr bki Dávïìd mba yeâ mmboè. E ka' mú' keèñ, ñwáè ceteè ka', e ka' cete, ñwáè mú' ka'.	To the angel of the assembly in Philadelphia write: He who is holy, he who is true, he who has the key of David, he who opens and no one can shut, and who shuts and no one opens, says these things:
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè e ja' Lot ce e m ba ñwáâ nyáánïì. Ntee yi m ce yañ ye njo' ndeâe mbembep ce beèe ce aè mla' ca a m ce geèe.	and delivered righteous Lot, who was very distressed by the lustful life of the wicked
E kòŋ à rsuŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ, mɛ̀ ku sor a rîŋ.	He didnʼt want to tell me, and I just insisted and understood it.
Baná be keè ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a fúú efa rkwe, tá njeñwáè ca ba ñgwa nda, aèmboè yi yu ená bfúr beèe nsaèamba ca wááwá a m ba bduu vi naè?”	"Therefore in the resurrection whose wife of them will she be? For the seven had her as a wife."""
Ñwáè moè' yu aègho ce e m be du mbe buèu caa efa Muu Ñwáè ce e m loè embo a suu njep ñgoèñ na ka'.	No one has ascended into heaven, but he who descended out of heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven.
Abraèham aè m byemi ená Aisïìk aè ka' kwe, Nyúè ku túr ñger aè rgeèe tá e kúti nteèe. AÈde' seèe laa seená Aisïìk aè m ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e m kwe wáá, Nyúè aè fúr ye efa rkwe, yïì ta aè konïì lá ye wa'a.	concluding that God is able to raise up even from the dead. Figuratively speaking, he also did receive him back from the dead.
Máè laa mánáê, ‘M be geèe má ká Tataê?’ Tata aè beesïì enáê, ‘Naèti mbekïì du aè rla' Daèmaskoès. AÈ be baè' aèfo tá a suñ wáè buu wááwá ce Taèr aè ce ená aè geêe.’	I said, 'What shall I do, Lord?' The Lord said to me, 'Arise, and go into Damascus. There you will be told about all things which are appointed for you to do.'
E ka' laèa neè ye wa' wáá, a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ aè rvúè a máâ mbuèu baná ñgaèñ kani yïì nyor, byá' yi kïìntaa vú a máâ mbuèu,	"Then Jesus said to his disciples, ""If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me."
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ce vúèshi ye foñ, a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “E m jaè' beèe mo' a moo aè rjaè' yi tu laèr.	"Likewise, also the chief priests mocking among themselves with the scribes said, ""He saved others. He can't save himself."
Woweèe a ka' naètïû aè rla' Págaè a du a ba' aè rla' Antïìyoèk aè ñgoâñ Pïìsidïìyaè. AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa Juês, woweèe a niñ mbe ndaèp rloo a cu aè nsheè.	But they, passing on from Perga, came to Antioch of Pisidia. They went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down.
Pastò kaʼ zhɛɛ yuu banɛ e coosi tu sê.	If a pastor steals then he has disgraced himself so much.
Mdip mi kʉ̀te àgho.	Water has poured on it.
Awá Saimún Pitaè ce e m túr saè', aè co' embaè ruèu, a tee tuè' maè' ese ñkwaèa ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. A m ce too ñkwaèa anaè ená Markuès.	Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it, and struck the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear. The servant's name was Malchus.
Nyúè aè m tuu Muu yïì njep ñgoèñ ená e vú sa' beèe enjep ñgoèñ ka', e m tuu Muu yi ená woweèe a bo luèñ njo' ye.	For God didn't send his Son into the world to judge the world, but that the world should be saved through him.
A ke kupshi tamfar tɛ e bo tap e.	The father of twins is usually massaged so that he can become strong.
Baná ñwáè efa beèe a mntaar ca ce aè ce kwaè'shi ená e m ba nfúr neè ñwáè ce e m gweè mbe mmbo byáèá naè aè m ba nda?”	"Now which of these three do you think seemed to be a neighbor to him who fell among the robbers?"""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè bcor Jisos Kraâis ce vi m ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, a be riñ máè ka'.	I was still unknown by face to the assemblies of Judea which were in Christ,
Bɛr njàp ca zhi ku bii a?	Is some leftover soup remaining?
Rbyemïì li m geèe taèr ba ma yïì Musïìs a ka' bi Musïìs, a ke' yú ye ka', a súti mbe ndaèp aè mñwáá btaar. Woweèe a m yá ená muu waèp anaè boèñ seê, a ke' wáp yap yu aè rbú' ncir ñkúú ka'.	By faith, Moses, when he was born, was hidden for three months by his parents, because they saw that he was a beautiful child, and they were not afraid of the king's commandment.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' li rkwe ce e m kwe naè, e ba seè'ni ba ñwáè ce e táá mbetar Nyúè ba ñwáè, a gee leâ' fi, tá beèe ce Nyúè aè ce a bo koni buu bboèñboñ ce Nyúè aè kaè' neè woweèe naè, túr buu anaè nfeseè. Li rkwe anaè li geèe beèe ce a m ce geèe buu bbebep aè nfeè' ce leè' entombïì yi m kur woweèe naè, a ce luèñ.	For this reason he is the mediator of a new covenant, since a death has occurred for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first covenant, that those who have been called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance.
Ñwáè moè' ka' yá nfúr yïì e ce geèe yuu bebep ce aède' e gee e kwe ka', ñgaèñ loo tá Nyúè fa ye ryoèñ. M ce laèa ba aèmboè beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep ce aède' vi gee woweèe a kweñgeèr ka'. Yuu bebep ce e geèe ñwáè kwe yu aègho, geewa'a m ce laèa máná e loo aè yuu bebep anaè ka'.	If anyone sees his brother sinning a sin not leading to death, he shall ask, and God will give him life for those who sin not leading to death. There is a sin leading to death. I don't say that he should make a request concerning this.
Yïì beèe aè m baèa ye seê, a tuu beèe a yeâ mbuèu ená a du laa neè ñgaâa ghar kúú enáê, ‘Weèr ce koèñ ená ñwáè ca ba yeèr ñkúú ka'.’	But his citizens hated him, and sent an envoy after him, saying, 'We don't want this man to reign over us.'
AÈde' seèe laa seè'ni ená rraa ce li m ba njep rsa' rrúèú na li ker ce yááti aè yuu ka' njobeè' seèe ce jáèr seè'ni ba njep rsa' rfi ce li ce raa a caa ñger.	For most certainly that which has been made glorious has not been made glorious in this respect, by reason of the glory that surpasses.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a ker be'ti nyor a ce sañ yuu aè nsheè neè ntubo.	Again he stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground.
Jisoès aè múè' nduunjïû fi tá seèe bo niñ mbe dïì' anaè, koni ryoèñ. E múè' nduunjïì anaè neè yïì nyor. Cena yi yu aèmboè e tii lá ndaèñ ce a m teni rum enje mú naè aègho wa'a.	by the way which he dedicated for us, a new and living way, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh;
Nfeè' moè' be ba ce mdoñ rúú ce wáè yá, ba nyaèa caè a be baèa kwaèraè ca, faèp buu ese ye wááwá tá e kar mbuèuriñ. A be sáá nyaèa efa yeâ nyoèr ye, keèr loèr mor toèo ye aègho.”	The ten horns which you saw, and the beast, these will hate the prostitute, and will make her desolate, and will make her naked, and will eat her flesh, and will burn her utterly with fire.
Ka' ba ená weâe ke geèe búè nyúè mmbomntaa faè dïì' weèe bo bú' ncir Musïìs ka', weèe aè ka' ce bepsi ntee neè máè njobeè' máè geèe ñwáè aè luñ boèñboñ efa yi yañ nyúè mmbomntaa njoká?	If a boy receives circumcision on the Sabbath, that the law of Moses may not be broken, are you angry with me, because I made a man completely healthy on the Sabbath?
Mncir vi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè rbyemïì ka'. Mncir vi laèa yi ená ñwáè yu'ni neè vi yu'ni. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' lá mncir wááwá, ñgaèñ ka' koni ryoèñ.”	"The law is not of faith, but, ""The man who does them will live by them."""
Bfúr waê, m be feè'ni yuu ce m ce laèa aè yuu ce beèe a ke geèe. Beèe a mmbaa a ka' ye leè', aède' moè' bú' leè' anaè ka'. AÈde' moè' ker kyese yuu mo' mbenduè leè' anaè ka', njobeè' a kur wáá.	Brothers, speaking of human terms, though it is only a man's covenant, yet when it has been confirmed, no one makes it void, or adds to it.
Woweèe a ce geèe rloo neè máè aè cicïì, njobeè' a ce yá'ni beèe mncir ce aè láè ba beèe.’	But in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.'
Mmisèe mi ku cu.	Everyone has sold beans.
Blaâa Nyúè vi yu bteèe, a túr ñger, vi cáp a caa sa' mbyáèráñ. Vi loè niñ njep ntee ñwáè ker niñ njep mi mkwaè'shïì caa aèmboè saè' mbyáèráñ e ke niñ nje yuu naè. Blaâa Nyúè ca vi ke geèe buu ce ñwáè ce kwaè'shi njep yeâ ntee vi yáátïì aèwañ.	For the word of God is living, and active, and sharper than any two-edged sword, and piercing even to the dividing of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and is able to discern the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
A m toèo mor mbe mambe koêr, beèe a cu a ce yár, Pitaè aè cu fa waâp mú foñ.	When they had kindled a fire in the middle of the courtyard, and had sat down together, Peter sat among them.
Rbuu ba nshe a be keèe mïì, geewa'a wa blaèa vi be keèe mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
“Buu yu magoèr ce máè ba suñ weèe, aè ba njobeè' m ka' suñ weèe seè'ni na, vi caa ye ñger.	"I have yet many things to tell you, but you can't bear them now.
John	Joân	16	13	Be ba aè nfeè' ce Yú' ce yi ke suñ beèe yuu mini yi vúè, tá yi gee tá weèe riñ buu wááwá ce vi yu mini. E be laèa buu ba aè ñger yi ka'. E be kuè laèa ba buu ce e yu'. E be suñ weèe buu ce vi bii ka' ba.	However when he, the Spirit of truth, has come, he will guide you into all truth, for he will not speak from himself; but whatever he hears, he will speak. He will declare to you things that are coming.
John	Joân	16	14	Yú' anaè yi be kuè'si máè njobeè' buu ce yi be suñ weèe vi be loè ba ese máè.	He will glorify me, for he will take from what is mine, and will declare it to you.
John	Joân	16	15	Buu wááwá ce Taèr túr, yu wa. A mbuèu ce m ce laèa máná Yú' yi be koo buu ese máè, suñ neè weèe.”	All things whatever the Father has are mine; therefore I said that he takes of mine, and will declare it to you.
John	Joân	16	16	Jisoès aè m ker laa enáê, “Nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè ka', e ba nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè.”	A little while, and you will not see me. Again a little while, and you will see me."
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ka' ce suñ máè ce suñ aèmboè ya tu wa'a, yuu ce m ce suñ yi yu yáánïì njobeè' máè rïìñ faèdïì' ce máè vúè, a riñ faèdïì' ce m ce duè. Weèe rïìñ faèdïì' ce máè vúè ka', a riñ faèdïì' ce m ce duè ka'.	"Jesus answered them, ""Even if I testify about myself, my testimony is true, for I know where I came from, and where I am going; but you don't know where I came from, or where I am going."
E sàr nsuŋ anà nè ŋwɛ̀ wɛɛwɛ.	He has disclosed the news to everybody.
Nyúè aè kaè' seèe ená rbuu rfi ba nshe nfi be keè ba, tá buu wááwá vi ku ba byáánïì aè ñgoèñ anaè. A yuu ce seèe cu seè'ni a ce ke'.	But, according to his promise, we look for new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells.
Beèe ce a m da'se yap naè, a m ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè bdïì' wááwá ce woweèe a m duè.	Therefore those who were scattered abroad went around preaching the word.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. AÈ m ce ñwáè a ce máè ená m gee rfaè' ca ka'. Máè m koo ñger ese ñwáè moè' aè rgeèe rfaè' ca foñ ka'. AÈ m ce ba Jisos Kraâis ba Taèr Nyúè ce e m fúr Jisoès efa rkwe.	Paul, an apostle (not from men, neither through man, but through Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him from the dead),
Bo zhi tàte mɛ̀, mɛ̀ riŋ à rghashi ŋwàʼ ca kaʼ.	My hand is numb, I donʼt know how to handle this book.
Yá neè ená ñwáè wááwá ku gee ba yuu ce Nyúè aè fa ye ñger ená e geêe. Ñwáè wááwá ku ba aèmboè e m ba tá Tata Nyúè ka' ká' ye. A yuu ce m ce yá'ni aè bcor wááwá.	Only, as the Lord has distributed to each man, as God has called each, so let him walk. So I command in all the assemblies.
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' tá ye bráâd ca, ker ce no enjep ndoñ ca aè njïû yáánïì ka', baná ñgaèñ aè loèr nyor ba bláá Tata aè yuu cicïì.	Therefore whoever eats this bread or drinks the Lord's cup in a way unworthy of the Lord will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord.
M ̀ be fʉʉ laa ŋgwaʼ àyàŋsè.	I shall provide the society tomorrow.
Dù koni ye à rfàʼ.	Go and help him do the work.
Nlaèa anaè yi m beèeñger aè ñwáè ghup, a cu a weâr mú. Weèr aè m yá yi foèo ce yi m loè ba ese yïì Taê. Nyúè aè m fa njáèá foèo ca ba neè muu yïì ce e ku ba moè'sir. Weèr aè m yá rboâñ Nyúè ba mini Nyúè ba njep ye.	The Word became flesh, and lived among us. We saw his glory, such glory as of the one and only Son of the Father, full of grace and truth.
M ce koèñ máná weèe riñ Febeè ce e yu njar yïìseèe, ce e yu dikoèn embe cor aè rla' Keñkáèraè.	I commend to you Phoebe, our sister, who is a servant of the assembly that is at Cenchreae,
A m geèe bcuèu ñka' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú anaè neè njáèá bluèr mo' ce a m ce too ená, “Páêl.” Bluèr anaè vi m ba ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú a ghááte aè bcuèu efa gho wááwá. A m geèe mnduunjïû aè rla' ca neè gul ce e m ce raañger aèmboè glaês.	The twelve gates were twelve pearls. Each one of the gates was made of one pearl. The street of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
Àdeʼ à beʼ ŋwàʼ à limbùm a?	Can you read in Limbum?
Wáè caèa yeèr ta Abraèham a? E m kwe. Ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè anaè a kweñgeèr foñ. Wáè ka' ce laèa yo ená a wáè nda?”	"Are you greater than our father, Abraham, who died? The prophets died. Who do you make yourself out to be?"""
Tata Jisoès be jaè' máè efa ñgá' wááwá, loèr máè duè aègho mbe buèu mbe dïì' ce e ce sa' yi kúú. Seèe ku'si ye aè nfeè' wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me for his heavenly Kingdom; to whom be the glory forever and ever. Amen.
Ñwáè aè ka' ce faè' neè Kraâis aè njáâá wa'a, baná Nyúè be yu' rboèñ neè ñgaèñ, tá beèe a vúse ye.	For he who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God and approved by men.
M ce laèa neè weèe ená Kraâis aè m vúè aè ñwáè rfaè' neè Jus tá Nyúè bo geèe buu ce e m kaè' neè viseèe bta naè, duèñshi ená e yu ñwáè mini.	Now I say that Christ has been made a servant of the circumcision for the truth of God, that he might confirm the promises given to the fathers,
Saèkaèriyaè aè ka' ba mbo wa'a, ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè nyáá, a táá aè ñgúè' bo maè' dïû' ntoèo nráèá.	An angel of the Lord appeared to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
Buu ca aè ba geèe tá see seèe foñ riñ ená seèe aè ba koèñ buu bbebep aèmboè viseèe bta a m koèñ naè ka'.	Now these things were our examples, to the intent we should not lust after evil things, as they also lusted.
Woowèe a tùr, a baʼri ndap.	They have managed and built a house.
Cena yi m ba wa'a, tá nlaèa ce Jisoès aè m laèa kuu njáèá rkwe ce e be kwe naè yi bo kuè ghááte njo.	that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled, which he spoke, signifying by what kind of death he should die.
Ndì à tàʼ zhi mbàa a yɛ.	Ndi searched for his money and found it.
E be geèe ku' buu goèr se tá e bo bo' beèe ce a ce bú aègho. Woweèe a ce bú njobeè' a m kani aè rkoèñ mini ce e m ba geèe tá woweèe a luêñ.	and with all deception of wickedness for those who are being lost, because they didn't receive the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
Kǎaŋkòʼ zhi gwɛɛ mbǔuŋgʉp sê.	Crows are too fond of eggs.
A m bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, suñ weèr nfeè' ce buu ca be koni. Yuu ce yi be duèñshi ená nfeè' ce buu ca be koni aè gháá, yu ká?”	Tell us, when will these things be? What is the sign that these things are all about to be fulfilled?
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “A máè ye. Weèe be yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e cu aè bo maè' Nyúè ce e túr ñger wááwá, keèr yá foñ aèmboè e ce suèu aè múè mmbaè'.”	"Jesus said, ""I am. You will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of the sky."""
Nyúè aè m ka' ba gee Abraèham ba yáánïì njobeè' buu ce e m geèe, Abraèham aè m ba túr yuu ce aètaè e m ba naa nyor aègho. Geewa'a, e m túr yuu mo' aè rnaèanyor aègho aè bsii Nyúè ka',	For if Abraham was justified by works, he has something to boast about, but not toward God.
Weèe aè ka' loo ka' njáèá ká aè máâ rlii, m be geèe yi.	If you will ask anything in my name, I will do it.
Nyúè aè m koèñ beèe enjep ñgoèñ magoèr seê, a tuu Muu yïì ce e ku ba moè'sir ená ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè ye, e bo kwe ka', koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	For God so loved the world, that he gave his one and only Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger aè múè msini naè, yu beèe ce a yu' nlaèa Nyúè,	Others are those who are sown among the thorns. These are those who have heard the word,
Weèr ce loèr buu bïìr ca ce siñsi bfee beèe enjep ñgoèñ na aègho, ker ba njáèá buu ce beèe a ce kwaè'shi, ce vi geèe woweèe a máñnïì bfee Nyúè. Weèr ce loèr vi ce so mkwaè'shïì beèe aègho tá woweèe a bo yu'ni neè Jisos Kraêis.	throwing down imaginations and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ;
“Yaè beèe, blaâa Nyúè vi be kuè ghááte aèmboè Yú' Rara yi m laèa njïì enjep Dávïìd, kuu Judaès ce e m duèñshi njïì neè beèe ce a m koo Jisoès.	"Brothers, it was necessary that this Scripture should be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit spoke before by the mouth of David concerning Judas, who was guide to those who took Jesus.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	1	17	E m ba moè' efa seèe ce a m fa ye rfaè' ce seèe ce geèe na foñ.”	For he was numbered with us, and received his portion in this ministry.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	1	18	Judaès ca aè m loèr yi mbaèa bláá ce e m koni naè a yuu ñkúè aègho. E m gweè aè yeâ ñkúè anaè njep nshe neè bsii, rbúè li watïì, bto vi fúú aè mñkúè.	Now this man obtained a field with the reward for his wickedness, and falling headlong, his body burst open, and all his intestines gushed out.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	1	19	Beèe wááwá aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m yu' yuu ce yi m koni Judaès. Woweèe a ka' yu', a too ñkúè anaè aè yaèp li ená AÈkádámaè. Mbuèu efa gho aè ba ená, “Ñkúè Bláá.”	It became known to everyone who lived in Jerusalem that in their language that field was called 'Akeldama,' that is, 'The field of blood.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	1	20	“A sañ mbe Ñwaè' Byáá enáê, ‘Tá yïì ndap ba mboèmmbo, tá ñwáè ke' cu mbo ka'.’ A ker sañ mbo foñ enáê, ‘Tá ñwáè moè' lor yi nta' rfaè'.’	For it is written in the book of Psalms, 'Let his habitation be made desolate. Let no one dwell therein;' and, 'Let another take his office.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	1	21-22	Baná seèe be ce ñwáè moè' tá e lor yi nta' rfaè' tá weèr woweèe bo suñ beèe ená weèr aè m yá Jisoès aè nfeè' ce e m fúú efa rkwe. Seèe ce ñwáè ce seèe woweèe aè m ba aè nfeè' ce Jisoès aè m ce kar seèe woweèe, ká' embe nfeè' ce Joân aè m ce baèptir beèe, du ba' mbe nfeè' ce Tata Nyúè aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe buèu.”	Of the men therefore who have accompanied us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, to the day that he was received up from us, of these one must become a witness with us of his resurrection."""
Wèr be capshi mkuu efa mʉ̀ʉ kwâa.	We will sort beans from the maize.
Wèr à dù à mŋkʉ̀ʉ a kap ŋjàp gòr sê.	We have gone to the farm and harvested a lot of vegetables.
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Máè rïìñ máná Máèsayaè ce a too ená Kraâis naè be vúè. E be vúè tá e suñ seèe buu wááwá.”	"The woman said to him, ""I know that Messiah comes,"" (he who is called Christ). ""When he has come, he will declare to us all things."""
Rkwe li m vúè njep ñgoèñ na njo' yuu ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe. Beèe a be keè fúú efa rkwe foñ njo' yuu ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe.	For since death came by man, the resurrection of the dead also came by man.
Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni. AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa yuu mini se a kuu weèe aè nfeè' ce e m ce cep ntuu Nyúè,	You hypocrites! Well did Isaiah prophesy of you, saying,
Mwɛɛ mi ce koʼni.	Cats are mating.
Yi m ku ba wa'a foñ neè njeñwáè saèkïì ce a m ce too ená Rahaèp. E m ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' e m súèti ñgaâa ñker ce beèe Isráèl a m tuu, a duñshi woweèe nduunjïì mo', woweèe a cañ a kúti.	In the same way, wasn't Rahab the prostitute also justified by works, in that she received the messengers, and sent them out another way?
Wèr à làa buu ce bvi kuu ye.	We have said things that concern him.
Woweèe a ker yop enáê, “AÈleèluyaè! Rla' ca li ce she, tá njemor yi ko' mbekïì, mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.”	"A second said, ""Hallelujah! Her smoke goes up forever and ever."""
Beèe wááwá a be keèe baèa weèe njo' máè. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap du ba' aè lúèsimbuèu, ñgaèñ be luèñ.	You will be hated by all men for my name's sake, but he who endures to the end will be saved.
Weèe ka' niñ coêr, beèe ce a rïìñ aè rlaèa li ce woweèe a m be yá'ni ka', a ka' ba a weâe mú aèñgoo seê, woweèe a fa laèa bsïìp ka'. Beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mntaar áè, efa woweèe a ka' laêa, yi ba yáánïì. Moè' e laèa mïìsi wáá, moè' ka' laêa, ker ba ená a ka' ce laèa, ñwáè moè' beesi blaèa anaè aè li ce aède' beèe a yu'.	If any man speaks in another language, let it be two, or at the most three, and in turn; and let one interpret.
Njeñwáè moè' efa múè bbyeèñge ca ce a m ce too ená Lidïìyaè a m yu' yuu ce weèr aè m laèa. AÈ m ba ñwáâ aè rla' Taèitiraè, a ba ñwáè ce e m ce fyeèni bcáè' ce vi m luèu ntaa. AÈ m ba njeñwáè ce e m ce loo neè Nyúè. Nyúè aè m múè' yi ntee, e byemïì blaâa Nyúè ce Pol aè m feè'shi.	A certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, one who worshiped God, heard us; whose heart the Lord opened to listen to the things which were spoken by Paul.
M be vʉ̀ wɛɛ à kaʼ dù.	I will come before you go.
Fáñ yi m loè a yááti mbe nfeè' ce Hároèd aè m ká' ñkaè' yi noèñ ce a m bi ye. E m be beâe bgoèrgoèr embe yeâ nto', ba bsoogáè ce bgoèrgoèr, ba boèo mlii mo' ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	Then a convenient day came, that Herod on his birthday made a supper for his nobles, the high officers, and the chief men of Galilee.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Fa neè buu ñkúú neè ñkúú, fa vïû Nyúè neè Nyúè.” Woweèe a ba neè rgha'nïì-ñwáè aè ryu' njáèá laèa ca.	"Jesus answered them, ""Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."" They marveled greatly at him."
Ka' cu, ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe anaè aè fuñ enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, m ce bu' mmbo neè wáè ená aè fyá' muu waè ca. Ku ba muu ce m túr caè'caè'.	"Behold, a man from the crowd called out, saying, ""Teacher, I beg you to look at my son, for he is my only child."
E beesïì a laa enáê, “Rtarnïì li yu njo ka', AÈlajaè be vúè wáá, geèe tá buu wááwá kúti aèmboè vi m ba. Baná a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená Muu Ñwáè be kuè yá ñgá' seê, tá beèe a jaasi ye njoká?	"He said to them, ""Elijah indeed comes first, and restores all things. How is it written about the Son of Man, that he should suffer many things and be despised?"
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Saimúèn, m túr yuu aè rsuñ wáè.” E laa enáê, “Suñ laè máè, ñwáè ryá'nïì.”	"Jesus answered him, ""Simon, I have something to tell you."" He said, ""Teacher, say on."""
Mor anaè yi be keè liiti nyúè moè' ka'.	where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.'
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Beèe mo' a ce laèa ená yu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe, beèe mo' a ce laèa ená yu AÈlajaè, beèe mo' a ce laèa ená, ka' tá ba Jáèrïìmiyaè ka' baná yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè moè'.”	"They said, ""Some say John the Baptizer, some, Elijah, and others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets."""
Beèe magoèr a m lapni ye ená e cu nyañ. E ker misi a waa seè'ni magoèr seê, a laa enáê, “Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè máè.”	"Many rebuked him, that he should be quiet, but he cried out much more, ""You son of David, have mercy on me!"""
Beèe a m cu a ce keè', a ce tarni ená Joân yu Kraâis anaè lá.	As the people were in expectation, and all men reasoned in their hearts concerning John, whether perhaps he was the Christ,
Pitaè aè ku ce kuèushi keèñ; woweèe a ka' múè', a yá ye, a bááñger seê.	But Peter continued knocking. When they had opened, they saw him, and were amazed.
Njeñwáè ca aè geèe yuu ce yi ghááte aè ndeèe yi ñger. E cuè'ni mgúr ca fa máâ nyoèr aè rkupshi yaè nyor tá a ka' tuñ.	She has done what she could. She has anointed my body beforehand for the burying.
Yú' Rara yi duèñshi seèe ená tañshïì ce e m geèe nfeè' moè'sir naè yi m ghááte. Yi káè' a laa enáê,	The Holy Spirit also testifies to us, for after saying,
Saimún Pitaè aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Tataê, aè ce duè ba fá?” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “AÈde' aè du faèdïì' ce m ce duè na seè'ni ka'. AÈ be loè ka' vúè a máâ mbuèu.”	"Simon Peter said to him, ""Lord, where are you going?"" Jesus answered, ""Where I am going, you can't follow now, but you will follow afterwards."""
Mɛ̀ yɛ àmbò e ce dòo mutù, zhi ghaʼ mɛ̀ sê.	I have seen him driving a car and that has surprised me.
Wèe à lɛ̀ vi bkwàŋ ba fɛ?	Where have you kept his rods?
Mnoâñ bbaa ca vi ka' caèa, Jisoès aè natïì a ce duè aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	After the two days he went out from there and went into Galilee.
Mɛ̀ m̀ bee du kaʼ.	I have never gone.
E ka' loè embo ce duè, a ker yá beèe mo' a baa ce aè m ba Jáêms, ce e m ba muu yïì Sábáèdïî, ba nfúr yïì ce Joân. Woweèe a m ba mbe keñ a yaèp ta weèe a ce cúúshi map mraa. Jisoès aè ká' woweèe.	Going on from there, he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. He called them.
E beesïì a laa enáê, “Mboè weèe aè beè' Ñwaâ' Nyúè a yá weená ñwáè ce e m boo beèe efa rkáè', e m boo mbañruèñwáè ba njeñwáè a?	"He answered, ""Haven't you read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female,"
A ka' yá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè wááwá ce roèo wáè.”	"and they found him, and told him, ""Everyone is looking for you."""
Máè m duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá m bo yá beèe ce a m ba ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisoès entombïì neè máè naè ka'. Máè m naèti cárcár seê, a du aè ñgoâñ AÈrábïìyaè, a ka' loâ aèfo a ku kúti ba aè rla' Daèmaskoès.	nor did I go up to Jerusalem to those who were apostles before me, but I went away into Arabia. Then I returned to Damascus.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ce geèe buu bbebep, a ba aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger naè, Nyúè aè gee seèe aè kútïì bteèe seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe. Yu njobeè' ntee boèñboñ ce Nyúè aè m túr neè seèe, ce seèe aè luèñ efa rkwe.	even when we were dead through our trespasses, made us alive together with Christ (by grace you have been saved),
Wèr à kumì nzhɛ̀ɛ anà nè bkʉ̀.	We have tied that thief with ropes.
AÈ m ba efa rkáè', Nlaèa yi ku ba. Yi m ba aèbee a Nyúè. Nlaèa anaè yi m ba Nyúè.	In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' Abraèham aè m gaèp buu bdïì' rúêú, lor dïû' mo'sir a fa neè Máèlkisidáèk naè, yi m ba aèmboè Lávïì ce boo vi a ke koo dïû' mo'sir efa buu rúú naè aè m lá fa foñ wa'a.	We can say that through Abraham even Levi, who receives tithes, has paid tithes,
Máè laèa wa'a njobeè' e ke ba aè nfeè' ce a ce ye byee, ñwáè ku ce ye vi byee, ke' ce kwaè'shi aèmboè beèe mo' ka'. Yi loè ba wa'a, njeè ce yañ beèe moè', beèe moè' a no mruè' mi koo woweèe.	For in your eating each one takes his own supper first. One is hungry, and another is drunken.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená faèdïì' wááwá ce a ka' ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ njep ñgoèñ na, a be suñ yuu ce njeñwáè ca aè m geèe naè, keèr ce kuushi ye.”	"Most certainly I tell you, wherever this Good News may be preached throughout the whole world, that which this woman has done will also be spoken of for a memorial of her."""
Yer mbʉ zhi kweŋger wɛɛ.	Our goats are all dead.
Koʼshi nje ŋgʉʼndap.	Shift nearer the wall.
Sataèn aè lor ye a du aègho mbe tu rtuèu, a duñshi ye bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na njaè' moè'sir,	The devil, leading him up on a high mountain, showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
Pol aè fyá' ñgaâa kansuèr ená ntuñ-ñ-ñ, a laa enáê, “Yaè beèe, máè cu la rcu vú ba' ntïìni na neè ntee rara-ñwáè aè bsii Nyúè.”	"Paul, looking steadfastly at the council, said, ""Brothers, I have lived before God in all good conscience until this day."""
Sàʼ yòo ca cɛp a?	Is this your knife sharp?
Caè'ni neè Tïìrfánaè ba Tïìrfosaè ce yu bbyeèñge ce a ce faè' neè Tata naè. Caè'ni neè Pásïìs ce e yu ñkaraè a ba foñ njeñwáè moè' ce e faè' neè Tata tatap se naè.	Greet Tryphaena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Greet Persis, the beloved, who labored much in the Lord.
Nyúè a m laèa enáê, ‘Yu'ni neè yoè ta ba yoè maê.’ A ker laa enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce e ka' cáp yïì taê, káè yïì ma áè, baná a be yú ñgaèñ.’	For God commanded, 'Honor your father and your mother,' and, 'He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him be put to death.'
Wèr à zheŋger a yuʼ sê.	We have eaten and we are satisfied.
Ncïìndap Nyúè embenjïì mo aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, máè yá rkaèñsïì aèmboè li suèu embe buèu a gwe aè nsheè. A fa bki ce rkaèñsïì anaè li bo múè' cuèu rwee aègho. Rwee anaè li m coomi seê, lúèsimbuèu aè ba aègho ka'.	The fifth angel sounded, and I saw a star from the sky which had fallen to the earth. The key to the pit of the abyss was given to him.
Muunje anaè aè ku lo mbekïì a ce jáèshi. E m ba bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú. Beèe a m báèáñger seê.	Immediately the girl rose up and walked, for she was twelve years old. They were amazed with great amazement.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Waè' weèe aè yu' buu ca wááwá a?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “ÁÈno.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Have you understood all these things?"" They answered him, ""Yes, Lord."""
Zhii yaŋ zhi yu sèʼni àndèe.	His sickness is better now.
Bjar vi a m cep ntuu neè ye enáê, “Tataê, ñwáè ce aè koèñ naè ce yañ.”	"The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, ""Lord, behold, he for whom you have great affection is sick."""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' koni yaè ñwáè ntuu, baná ñgaèñ aè koni máè. Ñwáè ce e ka' koni máè, baná ñgaèñ aè koni ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.”	"Most certainly I tell you, he who receives whomever I send, receives me; and he who receives me, receives him who sent me."""
Atà m̀ ̀ zhe zhii yuu kaʼ njobèʼ wèr woowèe e ke jì.	I cannot eat something given by him because we abstain from each other.
E ka' yu' ená e yu ñwáâ aè ñgoèñ ce Hároèd ce sa', e tuusïì ye neè Hároèd ce e m ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè nfeè' anaè foñ.	When he found out that he was in Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was also in Jerusalem during those days.
Bduu foñ a ba cu a wap bbyeèñge weèe neè bfee-ñwáè. Woweèe a ba rïìñ ená bbyeèñge a yu yap bwáèni, yu'ni neè woweèe. Woweèe a ba geèe wa'a njobeè' woweèe bsïìp a be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè ce li loè ese Nyúè njo' yi ntee boèñboñ. Woweèe a ba geèe wa'a faè dïì' yuu mo' yi bo jepsi lap rloo ka'.	You husbands, in the same way, live with your wives according to knowledge, giving honor to the woman, as to the weaker vessel, as being also joint heirs of the grace of life; that your prayers may not be hindered.
E m laèa neè ñwáè yañ ca enáê, “M ce laèa neè wáè máná aè nati mbekïì, lor yo keèñ du aè laè'.”	I tell you, arise, take up your mat, and go to your house.
Geewa'a woweèe a m rïìñ yuu ce e m laèa ka', a ce wáp aè rbipshi neè ye.	But they didn't understand the saying, and were afraid to ask him.
Jisoès aè ku fa bo a koo ye aègho, a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ yu ñwáè ce lo rbyemi li yu múcaèr. Wáè ba ce tarni njoká?”	"Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand, took hold of him, and said to him, ""You of little faith, why did you doubt?"""
Táá tatap, tami nyor aèmboè ñwáè mini tá mini ca ba aèmboè ñkaènda ce ñwáè maè' bïìr aè kur njep mbuèu. Maè'shi tá yo ñgeèe yi ba yáánïì. Njáèá ñgeèe ca yi tá'shi weèe aèmboè yuu ce ñwáè maè' bïìr aè yar a tá'shi yïì ñguèñ aègho wa'a.	Stand therefore, having the utility belt of truth buckled around your waist, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
Yàa tâ yu tu embe wěr ndàp.	My father is the head of our family.
Broñ ca vi doèoshi ñwáè e gee yuu bebep; yuu bebep ca yi ku', vú neè rkwe.	Then the lust, when it has conceived, bears sin; and the sin, when it is full grown, brings forth death.
Má ke kuushi wáè aè nfeè' m ce loo, ker ce yoèñshi Nyúè a wáâ tuè,	I thank my God always, making mention of you in my prayers,
Yi ker laa enáê, “M be keèr kuushi buu bbebep ba bsaèrbuu ce woweèe a geèe ka'.”	I will remember their sins and their iniquities no more.
Beèe anaè a ka' yu', yi joo yap ntee seê, woweèe a laa neè Pitaè ker ba bár ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès enáê, “Bfúr weêr, yuu ce aède' weèr geêe, yu ba ká?”	"Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart, and said to Peter and the rest of the apostles, ""Brothers, what shall we do?"""
rloo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, tú', bbaènïì ba mlap, ñko'ndoñ, ntee yayañ, bwer, ñgaèpni ba rcu jáá jáèá jáá,	idolatry, sorcery, hatred, strife, jealousies, outbursts of anger, rivalries, divisions, heresies,
Nyʉ̀ ŋgòr a zhǐ e ke cu embe bùu.	The mighty God is that which lives in heaven.
Nfò à dù ŋguu kaʼ banɛ zhi be bòo ye àmbùuŋkùr.	Nfor did not fetch firewood therefore it will cause him trouble in the evening.
Beèe mo' efa múè beèe Farïìsi a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce e loè ese Nyúè ka' njobeè' e cu mmbomntaa Nyúè ka'.” Beèe mo' efa waâp mú a laa yap enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè ba ba ñwáâ mbebep, e ba geèe yuu báèá ca aè njáâá ká?” Woweèe a ká' a ce kwaè'shi jáá jáèá jáá.	"Some therefore of the Pharisees said, ""This man is not from God, because he doesn't keep the Sabbath."" Others said, ""How can a man who is a sinner do such signs?"" There was division among them."
Jisoès aè ku riñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce kwaè'shi njáèá buu ca wa'a njoká?	"But Jesus, perceiving their thoughts, answered them, ""Why are you reasoning so in your hearts?"
Wàʼ muu Fàakɛ à ku caa waʼa?	Has Fakeʼs child just passed away like that?
Ŋòʼ kwâa ca zhe.	Take a handful of this corn and eat.
E m laèa wa'a njobeè' Jisoès aè m laèa neè yú' bebep caè ená yi fúú enjep ye. Yú' anaè yi m ce loâ koo ye aèmboè mruè' wa'a nfeè' aèñgoo seê. A m ce loâ kur ye neè bshañ aè mkoo ker ba aè mkuèu ce keè'ni ye. Yi geèe wa'a, e ceeshïì bshañ anaè, nyúèrkaè' lor ye du aègho aè ntee rïìñ.	For Jesus was commanding the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For the unclean spirit had often seized the man. He was kept under guard, and bound with chains and fetters. Breaking the bands apart, he was driven by the demon into the desert.
E m byemi ená ñwáè moè' du fa yïû mbuèu caa efa Pitaè ba Jáêms, ba Joân ce e m ba nfúr Jáms ka'.	He allowed no one to follow him, except Peter, James, and John the brother of James.
Woweèe a ka' baè', a ká' ñgaâa cor wááwá, a suñ woweèe buu ce woweèe a m geèe aè ñger Nyúè. A m suñ woweèe aèmboè Nyúè aè fa fáñ neè beèe enje jáá aè rbyemïì.	When they had arrived, and had gathered the assembly together, they reported all the things that God had done with them, and that he had opened a door of faith to the nations.
e ba aè ñgaèptú', weèe yá aèmboè rbuu li ce baèñ neè mmbaè'-ñwáè, weèe laa weená, ñgoèñ yi be bep neè fu' ntïìni seê. Weèe rïìñ aè rfyá' rbuu, rïìñ aèmboè ñgoèñ yi be ba. Ka' yi yu wa'a, aède' weèe riñ yuu ce ncoèo yïû seè'ni na táá aètu mo ka'.	In the morning, 'It will be foul weather today, for the sky is red and threatening.' Hypocrites! You know how to discern the appearance of the sky, but you can't discern the signs of the times!
Ka' ba aè nfeè' ce a ce yá'ni beèe, njeñwáè cu múnyañ, cu neè ryu'nïì-ñwáè.	Let a woman learn in quietness with all subjection.
Mmer mi mì.	Do you have beans?
Ram aè m bi AÈminadaèp, AÈminadaèp aè bi Nashoèn, Nashoèn aè bi Sarmoèn.	Ram became the father of Amminadab. Amminadab became the father of Nahshon. Nahshon became the father of Salmon.
Yi ba wa'a, tá mkwaè'shïì beèe magoèr mi bo yááti aèwañ. Ñkoosimnse ce e be keè ba aèmboè kaèafaâ' ncáncáp wa'a, be keè soèp yo ntee foñ.”	"Yes, a sword will pierce through your own soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed."""
Kʉʉsi yaa mbàa tɛ sò roŋni.	Give back my money so that we balance up.
ñgaèñ beesi embe ndaèp enáê, ‘Fa fa máè ñgá' ka', máè li' ya keèñ wáá, weèr boo wa weèe aè noèñte, aède' m ker nati mbekïì tá m bo fa yuu mo' neè wáè ka'.’	and he from within will answer and say, 'Don't bother me. The door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I can't get up and give it to you'?
Laèa buu ca neè beèe tá woweèe a bo cu rcu ryáánïì, faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo laèa yuu bebep kuèu woweèe ka'.	Also command these things, that they may be without reproach.
Njáèá mnsár ca vi loè ba aèmboè nfur ce e ke loè beeñger aè koètá naè. Beèe mo' efa múè ñgaâa mnsár ca yu Haèmáneyoès ba Fïìlátoès.	and their word will consume like gangrene, of whom is Hymenaeus and Philetus;
Nsuñ anaè aè baè' aè bdïì' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na. E geèe beèe a ce kupse yap ñgeâe bebep a ce geèe ba ñgeâe boèñboñ. Beèe magoèr se a ce byemi nsuñ ca. Nsuñ ca aè geèe weèe aè ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ foñ káâ' aè noèñ ce weèe aè m káè' yu', a riñ neè mini-ñwáè ená Nyúè túr ntee boèñboñ neè beâe bbebep.	which has come to you; even as it is in all the world and is bearing fruit and growing, as it does in you also, since the day you heard and knew the grace of God in truth;
Ñwáè ce e ka' be' blaèa ca baná e yu ñwáè Mboâñtu. Beèe ce a ka' yu' blaèa ca, gee aèmboè vi laèa baná woweèe a yu ñgaâa Mboâñtu njobeè' nfeè' ce buu ca vi be koni ku báti múcaèr.	Blessed is he who reads and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and keep the things that are written in it, for the time is at hand.
A be feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè ca aè ñgoèñ wááwá tá bto' wááwá a yu', tá ñgoèñ yi ka' mïì.	This Good News of the Kingdom will be preached in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.
Baná aède' seèe ker naatu a? Njïì moè' yu ka'. Njoká? Njobeè' Nyúè aè geèe seèe aè ba beâe byáánïì aè ke' ba ba njo' mncir ka', yu ba njo' rbyemïì.	Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what kind of law? Of works? No, but by a law of faith.
Jisoès aè ka' yá ená ku' beèe a sïìr ye, e laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a woweèe a tuu neèñguu roè.	Now when Jesus saw great multitudes around him, he gave the order to depart to the other side.
Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè ce e m geèe nfeèp aè ce yá buu naè aè ke' ba geèe tá ñwáè ca luñ efa rkwe ka' a?”	"Some of them said, ""Couldn't this man, who opened the eyes of him who was blind, have also kept this man from dying?"""
Cicà à ròo à rlip mɛ̀, mɛ̀ bɛʼ.	The teacher wanted to beat me and I ran swiftly.
M ker buu yuu seè'ni ka', m túr buu vi ce gha' máè gha'. M túr buu wááwá seè'ni njobeè' máè koo buu ce weèe a m tuusi neè máè mbe bo ÁÈpafroèditoès. Buu anaè yu aèmboè njáèá yuu mo' ce yi ce rúèú boèñboñ, a ba aèmboè tañshïì ce Nyúè aè koèñ, a byemi.	But I have all things, and abound. I am filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things that came from you, a sweet-smelling fragrance, an acceptable and well-pleasing sacrifice to God.
AÈmboè wáè m tuu máè njep ñgoèñ na má máè aè tuu woweèe njep ñgoèñ foñ.	As you sent me into the world, even so I have sent them into the world.
Máèári aè ka' yu' ntuu ce ncïìndap Nyúè aè m cep na, bfee vi jep ye, e ce señ ená yuu ce ncïìndap Nyúè aè laèa anaè yi yu ba ená ká lá.	But when she saw him, she was greatly troubled at the saying, and considered what kind of salutation this might be.
Yáê, máè fa weèe ñger aè rnyáèñshi mnyo ba mnyobsaa, a fa weèe ñger mbenduè ñwáè bbaèa. AÈde' yuu mo' yi joo weèe ka'.	Behold, I give you authority to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy. Nothing will in any way hurt you.
E ka' yá aèmboè woweèe a ce vúè aè rniñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè e loo mbaèa ese woweèe.	Seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, he asked to receive gifts for the needy.
M ce báá weèe. Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' blaèa ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca, ce yu blaèa ce vi loè ese Nyúè, kyese yuu mo' mbenduè mo, baná Nyúè be loèr ku' ñgá' ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca, kyeèse mbenduè ñgá' ce ñgaèñ be yá.	I testify to everyone who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if anyone adds to them, may God add to him the plagues which are written in this book.
E suñ weèr aèmboè njáèá njïì ce weèe koèñ beèe neè rkoèñnïì ce li loè ese Yú' Nyúè.	who also declared to us your love in the Spirit.
Seèe yoñshi Nyúè njo' yuu ce yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe. Baná yi yu ená m yu ñkwaèa neè mncir Nyúè enjep máâ ntee, yaè nyor aè ba ñkwaèa neè ncir yuu bebep.	I thank God through Jesus Christ, our Lord! So then with the mind, I myself serve God's law, but with the flesh, the sin's law.
E ka' yá Jisoès aèmboè e nyáá, e cañ a du a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi,	When he saw Jesus from afar, he ran and bowed down to him,
E fúr weèr efa ñgá' ce e m ba yú weèr. E be keèr fúr weèr. Weèr aè láè mmir ba mbe yeâ nduè ená ku ba ye ce e be kuè ce fúr weèr efa njáèá ñgá' anaè.	who delivered us out of so great a death, and does deliver; on whom we have set our hope that he will also still deliver us;
Máè yu' máná beèe mo' efa weâe mú a ce saèki. Njáèá saèkïì ca yu njáèá yïì ce aède' e ba ka', ka' aè múè beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka'. Máè yu' máná ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú ce koo ñgwa yïì taê.	It is actually reported that there is sexual immorality among you, and such sexual immorality as is not even named among the Gentiles, that one has his father's wife.
Nyúè aè m geèe nfeè' ñgá' e ba nlúè'shi. E m tá baè geèe wa'a ka', mbúè ñwáè aè m ba luèñ ka'. Nyúè aè m geèe nfeè' anaè aè lú'shïì wa'a njobeè' yïì beèe ce e m ce.	Unless the Lord had shortened the days, no flesh would have been saved; but for the sake of the chosen ones, whom he picked out, he shortened the days.
Nyúè ka' ce susi mjáá efa rïìñ, ce mi yááti ntïìni, e fúú aèyaèñseè, a too njep mor, baná e be suèsi yi weèe goèr aèmboè ká? Le rbyemïì li yu múcaèr.	But if this is how God clothes the grass in the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is cast into the oven, how much more will he clothe you, O you of little faith?
E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e geèe ca neè máè aè geèe Tataê. E fyá' máè a bur máè rïìtu ce yi m ce koo máè aè múè beèe naè embe tuè.”	Thus has the Lord done to me in the days in which he looked at me, to take away my reproach among men.
Jisoès aè ka' kwe, fúú efa rkwe a cu aè mnoèñ mkyeèe a yááti fa waâp mú nfeè' aèñgoo, a duñshi yïì nyor neè woweèe aè njáèá njïì ce rtarnïì li m ba njo ka', ená e yu nteèe. E m ce suñ woweèe aèmboè rsa' Nyúè ce e ce sa' aèmboè ñkúú.	To these he also showed himself alive after he suffered, by many proofs, appearing to them over a period of forty days, and speaking about God's Kingdom.
Ŋkar zhì à fa ye mbàa banɛ e nàa ye.	Her friend has given her money therefore she has uplifted her.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce yuu mo' yi m be ba ka', muu anaè aè ku ba. Buu wááwá yu aèmboè vi ba ba njo' ye.	He is before all things, and in him all things are held together.
Ñkúú ce e ce sa' woweèe yu ncïìndap mbembep ce e ce sa' njep rwee ce lúèsimbuèu yu aègho ka' naè. A too li rlii aè li Hibruè ená AÈbadoèn, too aè li Greâk ená AÈpolïìyoèn; mbuèu efa gho aè ba enáê, “Ñwáè rbepsïì.”	"They have over them as king the angel of the abyss. His name in Hebrew is ""Abaddon,"" but in Greek, he has the name ""Apollyon."""
Woowèe a ku vʉ mbòmmbo banɛ sèe be fa woowèe baa kaʼ.	They have come empty handed therefore we will not give them food.
e geèe yuu anaè ba neè seèe ce seèe yu boo wap. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe bkúèkúâ bbaa embe Ñwaâ' Byáá. A sañ mbo enáê, ‘AÈ yu muu waè, káâ' ntïìni, m yu yo taê.’	that God has fulfilled the same to us, their children, in that he raised up Jesus. As it is also written in the second psalm, 'You are my Son. Today I have become your father.'
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na e duñshïì beèe ená e ce geèe buu aè njïû yáánïì tá beèe a bo rïìñ ená e yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, a ker gee beèe ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis a ba byáánïì foñ.	to demonstrate his righteousness at this present time; that he might himself be just, and the justifier of him who has faith in Jesus.
Njeè ka' ce yañ ñwáè, baná ñgaèñ ye byee mbe yeâ ndaèp ka' vúê, faè dïì' weèe vú aèbee loè geèe ñgeâe bebep tá Nyúè sa' weèe ka'. M be fa weèe ncep aè buu mo' foñ, aè nfeè' ce m ka' vú ca'ni weèe.	But if anyone is hungry, let him eat at home, lest your coming together be for judgment. The rest I will set in order whenever I come.
a ka' yá njemor efa rla' ce li m ce she, a waa, a laa enáê, “Hábáê, rla' mo' li m be ba aèmboè rla' ca ka'.”	and cried out as they looked at the smoke of her burning, saying, 'What is like the great city?'
“Weèe ce kwaè'shi wee ká aèmboè ca? Ñwáè moè' aè m túr boo a baa. E m duè, a yá ñwáâ nlee a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Muu waè, duè fa' nsuu ntïìni.’	But what do you think? A man had two sons, and he came to the first, and said, 'Son, go work today in my vineyard.'
konikonì [kɔ́ní-kɔ̄nì] n 7.	sudden happening.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' li ce laèa wa'a, baná ku' ñgá' ce li be loè yá naè, be gweè mbenduè mo. Be ba aè noèñ ñgá' anaè tá li yañ, koosimnse, tá njeè koo li, mor yi ker toèo li foñ. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' yïìseèe Ta Nyúè túr ñger, baná ku ba ye ce e be sa' mnsa' rla' ca teni.”	Therefore in one day her plagues will come: death, mourning, and famine; and she will be utterly burned with fire; for the Lord God who has judged her is strong.
Weèe ku bii ce kuushi ená weèr aè m gá' neè weèe aèmboè tar muu e ke gá' neè boo vi naè.	As you know, we exhorted, comforted, and implored every one of you, as a father does his own children,
Gheèter ja' Sánaès ce e riñ mncir se naè, ker ja' AÈpoloès aè rjáèr ce woweèe a ce tami nyor aè rjáèr naè, yá ená woweèe a túr buu ce vi be jaè' woweèe aè rjáèr anaè.	Send Zenas, the lawyer, and Apollos on their journey speedily, that nothing may be lacking for them.
Máè yu' máná beèe mo' efa weâe mú a ce laèa enáê, “M yu ya weèr Poêl”, moè' enáê, “M yu ya weèr AÈpoloès”, moè' enáê, “M yu ya weèr Sáfaès”, moè' enáê, “M yu ya weèr Jisos Kraêis.”	"Now I mean this, that each one of you says, ""I follow Paul,"" ""I follow Apollos,"" ""I follow Cephas,"" and, ""I follow Christ."""
Waè' muu ka' loo rbuèuñgúp, e fa ye ba ñgaa a?	Or if he asks for an egg, he won't give him a scorpion, will he?
Cu waʼa tɛ m̀ vʉ̀.	Stay like that until I come.
A yuu ce yi jepsi máè nfeè' aèñgoo se aè rvúè caè'ni weèe.	Therefore also I was hindered these many times from coming to you,
E lo embo a du aè njïìsaèp ka', a gwe kúkúèp a loo a laa enáê, “Yaè Taê, yi ka' ba aètáèr, aè gee tá ndoñ ñgá' ca caa embe máâ tuè. Geewa'a, ke' ba ená aè gee ba aèmboè m ce koèñ ka', geèe ba aèmboè wáè koèñ.”	"He went forward a little, fell on his face, and prayed, saying, ""My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass away from me; nevertheless, not what I desire, but what you desire."""
Ñwaè' ca a sañ máâ Pol ba Silaès ba Timotïì neè ñgaâa cor ce a yu aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè, ce yu beèe yïìseèe Ta Nyúè, a ker ba beèe Tata Jisos Kraêis.	Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ:
E vʉ̀ mbena ŋkàràʼ baa.	She has come here two times.
Mbɛp à koo muu ce e ce yaŋ nà sèʼni.	That child who was ill now has good health.
Jisoès aè m ku yi enjep yeâ ntee ená a buu ce woweèe a ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce kwaè'shi buu ca njoká?	"Immediately Jesus, perceiving in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, said to them, ""Why do you reason these things in your hearts?"
M túr ntee njep weèe neè mini-ñwáè, a ce naèa tu neè weèe. Weèe ce geèe ya ntee yi ce fúte. Ka' weèr yu njep ñgá' wa'a, m be kuè ce lu'shi lu'shi njo' weèe.	Great is my boldness of speech toward you. Great is my boasting on your behalf. I am filled with comfort. I overflow with joy in all our affliction.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a ka' vúè aèbee aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “A be loèr Muu Ñwáè fa mbaè mmbo beèe,	"While they were staying in Galilee, Jesus said to them, ""The Son of Man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men,"
Weèr aè loâ aèfo a niñ mbe keñ a ce duè, fu' yi ka' ce vúâ aè mbeèp ce keñ aè m ce duè, weèr aè lá' aè mbeèp moâ' aè ñgoâñ Saiproès ce fu' yi m ce caèa ka'.	Putting to sea from there, we sailed under the lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
Taakwɛ̀ à m̀ ba njɛ̀ɛ nyàa ce e m feese sê.	Takwe was an animal which was very cunning.
Ñkúú Hároèd aè ka' yu' ca, yi fa ye ñgá' seê, a fa ñgá' foñ neè beèe wááwá aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	When King Herod heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
Taèr koèñ Muu yïì, a fa buu wááwá mba yeâ mmboè.	The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.
Bbyeèñge mo' a m ba aèfo foñ, a táá aè njïìsaèp a ce fyá'. Máèári aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Máèári ce aè m ba ma yïì Jáms ce ñká' ba Joseès, a m ba aè múè bbyeèñge ca a Saèlomeè weèe.	There were also women watching from afar, among whom were both Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and Salome;
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' ce beèe embe ñgoo Saèkaèriyaè a ce faè' mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, Saèkaèriyaè aè ce geèe li rfaè' aèmboè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè.	Now it happened, while he executed the priest's office before God in the order of his division,
Maa bbàr koo ŋgoʼ.	Ignore the excrement in order to catch termites.
Ñgaâa fuèp a be kuè ba weèe woweèe aè nfeè' sïìp. AÈde' weèe ja' woweèe aè nfeè' weèe aè gwáá. Geewa'a, seèe be ba aè nfeè' sïìp ka'.	For you always have the poor with you, and whenever you want to, you can do them good; but you will not always have me.
A ke bʉsi ŋkʉʉ, cʉʉ ye koter mbà rkoo.	When a chief is buried, a magical vine is tied around the wrist.
Fu' yi ká' a ce caèa goèr seê, rdip li ce beèeñger ce ko' mbekïì, ce suèu.	The sea was tossed by a great wind blowing.
baná weèe ker ba beâe aè to' Isráèl wááwá, aè ba rïìñ ená ñwáè ca aè jáèr boèñboñ ba aè rlii Jisos Kraâis ce aè rla' Nasaráèt. Jisoès ca yu ñwáè ce weèe aè m taa mbe kïìntaa, Nyúè aè fúr ye efa rkwe naè.	be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead, in him does this man stand here before you whole.
Jisoès aè m fúú embe ndaèp rloo a du mbe ndaèp mbe Saimúèn. Tu yi ce luu malu yïì Saimúèn seê, woweèe a laa neè Jisoès ená e ja' ye.	He rose up from the synagogue, and entered into Simon's house. Simon's mother-in-law was afflicted with a great fever, and they begged him for her.
E ka' laèa neè Pitaè baè' bkaâñ btaar enáê, “Saimúèn, muu Joân, aè koèñ máè a?” Ntee yi bep ye njobeè' e m bipshi neè ye ñkaèraè' taar enáê, “AÈ koèñ máè a?” E laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, aè rïìñ buu wááwá, aè rïìñ wáná m koèñ wáè.” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Nyañ ya njeèe.	"He said to him the third time, ""Simon, son of Jonah, do you have affection for me?"" Peter was grieved because he asked him the third time, ""Do you have affection for me?"" He said to him, ""Lord, you know everything. You know that I have affection for you."" Jesus said to him, ""Feed my sheep."
Ka' máè laèa wa'a, ñwáè ka' lor ne ñgwa, baná e geèe yuu bebep ka'. Muu ñgoèñgoè ka' du bguèu baná e geèe yuu bebep ka'. Weèe aè rïìñ ená beèe wááwá ce a ke cu aè nduu a ñgwa a ke yá ñgá' njep ñgoèñ na seê. Máè yá ya máná ñwáè aè ba cu ñkúè faè dïì' e bo yá njáèá ñgá' ca ka'.	But if you marry, you have not sinned. If a virgin marries, she has not sinned. Yet such will have oppression in the flesh, and I want to spare you.
Lòr bàa nè njàp ŋwɛ̀ vʉ àgho mbena.	Take the bag together with the vegetable and bring them here.
Nfeè' aè ka' gháá, Nyúè aè gee yi nlaèa yi yáátïì aèwañ, beèe a riñ buu ca. Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè' aè fa blaèa ca mba máâ mmboè ená m fe'shi neè beèe.	but in his own time revealed his word in the message with which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior;
Nfur ce e mʉ tʉr nà ce ghɛ̀ʼ ɛ.	The wound he sustained is getting bigger.
Beèe a m ce vúâ aè bbu' mla' jáá jáèá jáá aè ryá Jisoès. A ka' vúè kaari aè ma kúr, Jisoès aè ma' ñgaèa enáê,	When a great multitude came together, and people from every city were coming to him, he spoke by a parable.
Ntee yi m ce yañ bto' mo' neè wáè, nfeè' aè gháá ce ntee yi be yañ wáè foñ. Nfeè' aè gháá ce aè be sa' mnsa' beèe ce a kweñger. Nfeè' aè gháá ce aè be laè' ñgaâa mfaè' ce a m ce feè'shi wo blaèa, ker ba beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè wáè, káè yu beâe bgoèrgoèr áè, káè yu beâe bká'ká' áè. Nfeè' anaè yu nfeè' ce aè be bepsi beèe ce a m ce bepsi ñgoèñ ca.”	"The nations were angry, and your wrath came, as did the time for the dead to be judged, and to give your bondservants the prophets, their reward, as well as to the saints, and those who fear your name, to the small and the great; and to destroy those who destroy the earth."""
E m duè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a lor bráâd ce a m fa neè Nyúè, a ye, a fa bár neè beèe ce a woweèe a m ba. Ncir yi byemi ená ñwáè moâ' jáá ye caa efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ka'.”	"how he entered into the house of God, and took and ate the show bread, and gave also to those who were with him, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests alone?"""
Ñwáè wááwá aè ruu neè Yú' Rara, a ká' a ce laèa bli ce woweèe a m yá'ni ka', ce Yú' Rara yi m geèe woweèe a ce laèa.	They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other languages, as the Spirit gave them the ability to speak.
Woweèe a m túr mñgaèpni fa waâp mú kuu yuu ce Pol aè m laèa, a ka' naèti ce duè, Pol aè laa mbúè laèa neè woweèe. E m laèa enáê, “Yú' Rara yi m laèa yuu yáánïì neè weêe btarkú mbe nfeè' ce e m tuu AÈsayaè ce e m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè, e vú a laa enáê,	"When they didn't agree among themselves, they departed after Paul had spoken one word, ""The Holy Spirit spoke rightly through Isaiah, the prophet, to our fathers,"
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená aède' ñwáè rfaè' caa yïì masaè ka'. AÈbaè ñwáè ntuu caa ñwáè ce e tuu ye ka'.	Most certainly I tell you, a servant is not greater than his lord, neither one who is sent greater than he who sent him.
M ce laèa foñ ená aè kupshi dïì' rnoèñ neè máè, njobeè' m ce kwaè'shi máná le rloo li be geèe tá Nyúè ker tuusi máè neè weèe.	Also, prepare a guest room for me, for I hope that through your prayers I will be restored to you.
Máè m duè aè rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis aè rla' Trowaès, a ka' ba aèfo, a yá máná Tata Nyúè aè múè' nduunjïì neè máè aèfo aè rfaè' neè ye.	Now when I came to Troas for the Good News of Christ, and when a door was opened to me in the Lord,
Geewa'a, njeñwáè aè ka' táá tatap njep li rbyemïì ba rkoèñnïì, gee ñgeâe rara, cu yáánïì, baná Nyúè be jaè' ye embenjïì boo ce e ce bi.	but she will be saved through her childbearing, if they continue in faith, love, and sanctification with sobriety.
“Weèe aè yu' weená a m laèa enáê, ‘Fa koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè' ka'.’	"You have heard that it was said, 'You shall not commit adultery;'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	28	M ce laèa ya neè weèe ená ñwáè aè ka' yá njeñwáè ce kwaè'shi ená a ye a ba noèñ, baná e koo njeñwáè anaè wáá.	but I tell you that everyone who gazes at a woman to lust after her has committed adultery with her already in his heart.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	29	Lo rlir maè' li ka' gee wáè aè gee yuu bebep, aè so'nïì li enje tuè, ma'. Yi yu aèndeèe ená aè buu ñgúè' moè' efa wáâ nyoèr neè ce ená a ma' yoè nyor wááwá njep mor.	If your right eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	30	Yo bo maè' yi ka' gee wáè aè gee yuu bebep, aè tee yi ma'. Yi yu aèndeèe ená aè buu ñgúè' moè' efa wáâ nyoèr neè ce ená yoè nyor wááwá du njep mor.	If your right hand causes you to stumble, cut it off, and throw it away from you. For it is more profitable for you that one of your members should perish, than for your whole body to be cast into Gehenna.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	31	“A m laèa foñ enáê, ‘Ñwáè aè ka' juu ñgwa yïì, baná e fa ye ñwaè' aè rduèñshi ená e juèu ye.’	It was also said, 'Whoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorce,'"
Berɛ̀ŋ yèr à yuushî sê.	Our groundnut is very dry.
E m ker laa enáê, “Yuu ce yi ke fúú enjep ñwáè, aè yïì ce e ke geèe ye e ba jaèpri aè bsii Nyúè.	"He said, ""That which proceeds out of the man, that defiles the man."
Ká' embe nfeè' Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe vú ba' seè'ni na, beèe a ce fa ñgá' neè kúú Nyúè, ñgaâa ñger a ce faèp kúú anaè.	From the days of John the Baptizer until now, the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Máè m lu'shi seê, aè nfeè' ce bfúr mo' a m vúè a ce suñ máè aèmboè aè ce cu rcu ce li yu neè mini-ñwáè. Yi ku ba mini wa'a.	For I rejoiced greatly, when brothers came and testified about your truth, even as you walk in truth.
Yú' ca yi lor ye a du aègho mbe Ndaèp Nyúè. Ma muu ba tar muu a ka' vúè neè muu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè rgeèe yuu ce ncir yi m ce laèa ená a gee aètu muu,	He came in the Spirit into the temple. When the parents brought in the child, Jesus, that they might do concerning him according to the custom of the law,
Josáèf aè ka' lá' efa mmirloèè, a gee yuu ce ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè m suñ ye aè rlo naè, a lor ñgwa yïì a du a ye fa yeâ laè'.	Joseph arose from his sleep, and did as the angel of the Lord commanded him, and took his wife to himself;
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa enáê, “M túr nduu ka'.” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÂ laèa mini ghup ená aè túr nduu ka'.	"The woman answered, ""I have no husband."" Jesus said to her, ""You said well, 'I have no husband,'"
Seèe fa borni efa rtarshi aèbee ce geèe rloo neè Nyúè aèmboè beèe mo' a ce geèe naè ka'. Seèe fa bfúr mo' ba ñger tá a bo táá tatap, ñgáè'ni mo' aèmboè seèe aè rïìñ war ená noèñ ce Tata Jisoès be vúè yi yu aètútú naè.	not forsaking our own assembling together, as the custom of some is, but exhorting one another; and so much the more, as you see the Day approaching.
Wa bcɛ̀ʼ bvi bii bcòŋ.	My dresses are still wet.
Ŋgɛʼ e ke myɛ̀ʼte sê.	Ngeh is always very sad.
Wèr à yɛ bèe ncòp-mòʼsir à rʉ̀ʉ.	We have seen eleven people.
Ñgaâa ntuu ca a du a suñ neè ñgaâa teni mnsa'. Woweèe a ka' yu' ená Pol ba Silaès a yu beâe aè to' Rum, a wáp seê,	The sergeants reported these words to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans,
Mñgúè' ñka' kyeèe anaè wááwá vi m túr bcuèu vi btaar btaar. Bcuèu vi btaar vi m ba aè ñgúè' ekuè mbuèuntii, bcuèu vi btaar vi ba aè yïì embaè mbuèuntii. Bár mñgúè' ñka' bbaa vi m túr bcuèu vi btaar btaar foñ.	On the east were three gates; and on the north three gates; and on the south three gates; and on the west three gates.
E ke jèŋte àmbò zhì maa waʼa.	He acts foolishly like his mother.
E waa, a laa enáê, “Jisoès, Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè máè.”	"He cried out, ""Jesus, you son of David, have mercy on me!"""
Máè yoèñshi Nyúè njobeè' máè m baèptir ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú caa efa Krïûspoès ba Gayoès ka',	I thank God that I baptized none of you, except Crispus and Gaius,
Yuu ce Kraâis aè kaè' seèe, yu ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	This is the promise which he promised us, the eternal life.
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', woweèe a lor Jisoès embe mambe Kaifaès a du aègho mbe nto' yaèp govanoè. Woweèe a ka' vúè, a niñ mbe nto' ka' njobeè' woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rba brara aè bsii Nyúè tá woweèe a bo ye yap Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap.	They led Jesus therefore from Caiaphas into the Praetorium. It was early, and they themselves didn't enter into the Praetorium, that they might not be defiled, but might eat the Passover.
a ker ce keè' nfeè' ce muu yïì be suèu embe buèu. Muu yïì anaè yu Jisoès ce e m fúú efa rkwe, aè ba ye ce e be fúr seèe efa ku' ñgá' ce e be vúè aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè sa' ñgoèñ ca.	and to wait for his Son from heaven, whom he raised from the dead--Jesus, who delivers us from the wrath to come.
Fyɛ̀ɛ ŋgwe anà tɛ e karkar e.	Loosen that dog so that it to stroll around.
Loèr nfeè' faè dïì' aè gee yuu mo' ce yi gee tá ñwáè moè' gweê, káè yu Jus áè, káè yu beèe enje jáá áè, káè yu ñgaâa cor áè, fa keè moèo ka'.	Give no occasions for stumbling, either to Jews, or to Greeks, or to the assembly of God;
Blɛʼ ca bvi waŋger wɛɛwɛ.	These calabashes have all cracked.
Ŋwɛ̀ ca e ke tàʼte sê.	This man is always very busy.
Nfeè' ce a be mïìsi geèe yuu ce ncir yi laèa ená njeñwáè ce e bi muu gee tá e bo ba nrara aè bsii Nyúè aè ka' gháá, Máèári ba Josáèf a lor muu a du aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè rfa neè Tata Nyúè,	When the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord
AÈmboè Jisoès aè m ce yá'ni beèe mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, e lo a bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a laèa ená Kraâis anaè yu muu Dávïìd aè njáâá ká?	"Jesus responded, as he taught in the temple, ""How is it that the scribes say that the Christ is the son of David?"
AÈde' ñwáè moè' vú yá máè caa efa ená Taèr ce e m tuu máè aè geèe e vú a yá máè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' vú yá máè baná m be geèe tá ñgaèñ fúú efa rkwe aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu.	No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.
Máè tami nyor aè rvúè caè'ni weèe. M ka' vú ca'ni weèe baná máè caè'ni weèe seè'ni nfeè' taar. M be vúè tá m ba ntáèr neè weèe ka' njobeè' yuu ce m ce roèo yu ba yeè buu ka', m ce roèo ba weèe. Yi yu ená boo a fyá' aè wap mma ba wap bta ka'. Yi yu ba ená mma ba btaèr a fyá' aè boo wap.	Behold, this is the third time I am ready to come to you, and I will not be a burden to you; for I seek not your possessions, but you. For the children ought not to save up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
ñkúè aè ba ñgoèñ ca, ñgúè buu bboèñboñ aè ba beèe ce Nyúè yu yaèp ñkúú, ñke' aè ba beèe ce a yu beèe Sataèn.	the field is the world; and the good seed, these are the children of the Kingdom; and the darnel weeds are the children of the evil one.
A ka' baè' aè rla' ñwáâ ñgoèr anaè, a yá bjep vi ba aèfo, beèe a ce warse seê, a ce koosimnse.	He came to the synagogue ruler's house, and he saw an uproar, weeping, and great wailing.
Jisoès aè táá, a laa ená a vú neè ñwáè anaè fa neè ye. E ka' vúè baè' aètútú, e bipshïì neè ye enáê,	Standing still, Jesus commanded him to be brought to him. When he had come near, he asked him,
Joân aè ka' baèptir beèe wááwá, a baptir Jisoès foñ. Jisoès aè ka' ce geèe rloo, rbuu li mú'tïì.	Now it happened, when all the people were baptized, Jesus also had been baptized, and was praying. The sky was opened,
Beèe a ka' yá aèmboè blúr a ce laèa, beèe ce a m kepñger a ce jáèr, mntáèñ a ce jáèr boèñboñ, mnfeèp a ce yá buu, a bááñgeèr seê, a ku'si Nyúè beèe Isráèl.	so that the multitude wondered when they saw the mute speaking, injured whole, lame walking, and blind seeing--and they glorified the God of Israel.
ce weèe yu beèe ce weèe aè byemi, Nyúè aè ce keè'ni aè yi ñger, tá weèe bo koni rluèñ ce li be yááti aèwañ aè nfeè' elúèsimbuèu.	who by the power of God are guarded through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
Ñwáè aè ka' tá fa' ka', byemi ba neè Nyúè ená Nyúè a ñwáè ce e ke geèe beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep a ba byáánïì, baná Nyúè be loèr ñwáè anaè aèmboè ñwáâ nyáánïì neè mini-ñwáè, njobeè' e byemi neè ye.	But to him who doesn't work, but believes in him who justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for righteousness.
Pitaè aè ku luñ enáê, “Yi ka' ku ba ba ená soè kwe aèbee, m kanïì ka'.” Woweèe wááwá a ku laa wa' foñ.	"But he spoke all the more, ""If I must die with you, I will not deny you."" They all said the same thing."
Noèñ entoèmbïì efa mnoèñ ce a m ce ye bráâd ce a láè yes njo ka' yi m gháá. Noèñ anaè aè m ba noèñ ce a m ce sháshi njeèe ce a be ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aègho.	The day of unleavened bread came, on which the Passover must be sacrificed.
Weèe fa ba aèmboè Kán ce e m ba ñwáè Sataèn a yú nfúr yïì naè ka'. E m yú nfúr yïì ba njoká? AÈ m ba njobeè' buu ce e m geèe aè m ba buu bbebep, vïû nfúr yïì vi ba yáánïì.	unlike Cain, who was of the evil one, and killed his brother. Why did he kill him? Because his works were evil, and his brother's righteous.
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè beesïì enáê, “Yú' Rara yi be vúè mbe wáâ nduè, tá ñger Nyúè embe buèu yi tá'shi wáè. Baná a be keè too muu nrara anaè ená Muu Nyúè.	"The angel answered her, ""The Holy Spirit will come on you, and the power of the Most High will overshadow you. Therefore also the holy one who is born from you will be called the Son of God."
Mɛ̀ ba shɛni Ntandʉŋ tu nè rkɛ̀ɛ.	I shaved Ntaandungʼs head with a blade.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “AÈde' beèe ce a duè Ñkaâ' bguèu a ba aè nduu-guèu weèe ker ce jïì mdip a? Nduu-guèu aè ka' ku ba a woweèe aède' woweèe a ji mdip ka'.	"Jesus said to them, ""Can the groomsmen fast while the bridegroom is with them? As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they can't fast."
E nìʼ kùu, a ce nyɛ̀ʼ ntɛ̀ŋ.	He dislocated his ankle and was limping.
Woweèe a m ce tarte mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá, a ce bá'shi bráâd fa waâp mndaèp, a ce yeñger aèbee neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè, a ke' ce yu' nyor ka'.	Day by day, continuing steadfastly with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread at home, they took their food with gladness and singleness of heart,
Beèe a be kwe bwáp, aèmboè woweèe a be cu ce fyá' yuu ce yi be koni ñgoèñ aè nfeè' anaè, njobeè' buu ñger embe buèu na vi be cïì'ti.	men fainting for fear, and for expectation of the things which are coming on the world: for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
njobeè' Yú' Rara yi m be suu mbe waâp nduè ka'. A m ku baptir woweèe ba aè rlii Tata Jisoès.	for as yet he had fallen on none of them. They had only been baptized in the name of Christ Jesus.
“Yu' neè, ñwáè moè' aè m ce duè aè rbyeè buu,	"Listen! Behold, the farmer went out to sow,
Mark	Maêk	4	4	a ka' ce byeè, ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr aèwaâa nduunjïì, bsiñ vi vúê, a ye.	and it happened, as he sowed, some seed fell by the road, and the birds came and devoured it.
Mark	Maêk	4	5	Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr mbenduè nshe ce e m ba mbenduè ryáá, nshe anaè aè ba mbo goèr ka'. E m yaèñse a fúú njobeè' e m niñ njep nsheè goèr ka'.	Others fell on the rocky ground, where it had little soil, and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil.
Mark	Maêk	4	6	Nyúè aè ka' sañ, a toêo, e yoprïì njobeè' mñgaèñ vi m niñ njep nsheè boèñboñ ka'.	When the sun had risen, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it withered away.
Mark	Maêk	4	7	Moè' aè m gweèñger aè múè msini. Msini anaè mi ku', a kur, e ke' gee ñgúè ka'.	Others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.
Mark	Maêk	4	8	Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr mbe nshe mboèñmboñ a fúú, a ku' a gee ñgúè. Moè' aè gee mntaar, moè' aè gee mntuunfu, moè' rjeèe.”	Others fell into the good ground, and yielded fruit, growing up and increasing. Some brought forth thirty times, some sixty times, and some one hundred times as much."
Yi ka' tá baè ba ená beèe ce a kweñger a be fúú efa rkwe ka', weèr aè ba kuè ce yá ñgá' nfeè' sïìp njoká?	Why do we also stand in jeopardy every hour?
Geèe tá woweèe a baate yap cuèu njobeè' woweèe a ce yá'ni ba yuu ce yi yu yáánïì ka'. A ku ce roèo ba nduunjïì aè rkoni mbaèa aè njáèá njïì ce e yu neè rïìtu- ñwáè. Woweèe a jepsi rbyemïì embe mndap beèe mo' neè wap blaèa anaè.	whose mouths must be stopped; men who overthrow whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for dishonest gain's sake.
Cor aè ka' tuu woweèe wa'a, woweèe a du a caa aè ñgoâñ Foènishaè ba Saèmarïìyaè, a suñ beèe ená beèe enje jáá a kupse, a byemi neè Nyúè. Nsuñ ca aè m geèe bfúr wááwá a lu'shïì seê.	They, being sent on their way by the assembly, passed through both Phoenicia and Samaria, declaring the conversion of the Gentiles. They caused great joy to all the brothers.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe Farïìsi ca ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa mú ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a ká' kansuèr, a laa enáê, “Seèe be geèe seeká? Ñwáè ca ce duèñshi ku' mncoèo seê.	"The chief priests therefore and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, ""What are we doing? For this man does many signs."
E bòŋ à rkupshi nkɛ̀rsoo nè ntaaŋguu ce e tap e.	It is good to make a hoe handle out of a strong wood.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m kaè'ni ená ñwáè wááwá be fa aèmboè yi ñger yi yu, tá a tuusi rfa anaè neè bfúr aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, jaè' woweèe aègho.	As any of the disciples had plenty, each determined to send relief to the brothers who lived in Judea;
E m maè' ñgaèa neè woweèe foñ enáê, “AÈde' nfeèp duñshïì nfeèp moè' nduunjïì a? E ka' gee wa'a, woweèe bsïìp a ke' gweñger njep beè'teè a?	"He spoke a parable to them. ""Can the blind guide the blind? Won't they both fall into a pit?"
Mnoèñ vi ka' caèa waami, woweèe a ker kaari aèbee mbe ndaèp, Tomas aè ba a woweèe. Woweèe a m li' keèñ, Jisoès aè ku lo a nyáá a waâp mú, a laa enáê, “Cumúnyañ ba neè weèe.”	"After eight days again his disciples were inside, and Thomas was with them. Jesus came, the doors being locked, and stood in the midst, and said, ""Peace be to you."""
koo mnyo neè mmbo, a ka' no nli' e gee yuu neè woweèe ka'. Woweèe a be joèo ñgaâa byañ neè mmbo tá a ke'se.”	"they will take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it will in no way hurt them; they will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover."""
Sataèn ka' ce fúr Sataèn enjep beèe baná ñgaèpni yi yu nje nyoèr Sataèn. Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná aède' yi to' yi ka' táá aè njáâá ká?	If Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
Pitaè aè naa ye mbekïì, a ce laèa neè ye enáê, “Naèti mbekïì, má máè foñ ku ba ñwáè aèmboè wáè.”	"But Peter raised him up, saying, ""Stand up! I myself am also a man."""
Wɛ̀ làa a càase.	You spoke too much.
Nyúè aè m geèe buu ca aè lo a kúti aè buu bcicïì. AÈ m koèñ buu ca aè rkúti aè buu bcicïì ka', aè m koèñ Nyúè ená buu anaè ba wa'a, a ce keè' ená,	For the creation was subjected to vanity, not of its own will, but because of him who subjected it, in hope
E laa neè ye enáê, “Muu waè, lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè ke'seè. Duè neè rfúteè- ñwáè, yoè ñgá' aè mïì.”	"He said to her, ""Daughter, your faith has made you well. Go in peace, and be cured of your disease."""
Bbyeèñge mo' efa weâr mú a suñ weèr yuu mo' weèr aè bááñgeèr seê. Woweèe a ba du faèdïì' ce rsheè li yu aè ñgaèptú' e ntïìni na,	Also, certain women of our company amazed us, having arrived early at the tomb;
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger aè múè msini naè táá aètu beèe ce a yu' blaâa Nyúè ku byemi, a ce cu, mluè ce aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na, ba broñ buu, ba buu ce beèe a ke yu' rboèñ aègho, vi kur blaèa anaè, vi ke' yú mbaèñ ce yi teèe ka'.	That which fell among the thorns, these are those who have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares, riches, and pleasures of life, and bring no fruit to maturity.
Weèr aè ka' ke yar, weèr bo ba mbuèuriñ ka'.	if so be that being clothed we will not be found naked.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe njobeè' weèe yu aèmboè msheè ce mi ce yááti ka', beèe a jáèr ce caèa mbo, riñ ka'.”	"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like hidden graves, and the men who walk over them don't know it."""
Hároèd aè ká' ñgaâa bfee anaè mbe dïì' ce e m ku ba mimñgi', a bipshi neè woweèe, a yu' nfeè' ce rkaèñsïì li m yááti seeseê.	Then Herod secretly called the wise men, and learned from them exactly what time the star appeared.
Mnjè bwap a yu àfa kaʼ.	Their elders are not here.
Pailáèt aè laa neè ye enáê, “Mboè aè ce yu' ku' buu ce a laèa ená wáè geèe na a?”	"Then Pilate said to him, ""Don't you hear how many things they testify against you?"""
Nyúè aè ce weèe ená weèe ba yïì beèe. E koèñ weèe seê. Baná weèe gee ba ñgeèe ce yi duèñshi ená weèe yu yïì beèe. Ce koosi neè mnse neè beèe mo', gee ñgeâe boèñboñ neè woweèe. Loèr neè wee mnyor njep nsheè, ba neè rbonïì- ñwáè, ker kur ntee.	Put on therefore, as God's chosen ones, holy and beloved, a heart of compassion, kindness, lowliness, humility, and perseverance;
Jisoès aè m ker ká' ku' beèe ce a m ba aèfo a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yu'shi neè boèñboñ.	"He called all the multitude to himself, and said to them, ""Hear me, all of you, and understand."
AÈ m ba nfeè' entombïì ce a m ce beè' beèe. Kuèránoè aè m ba govanoâ aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè aè nfeè' anaè.	This was the first enrollment made when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
Wèr ye à m du ŋwaròŋ o du a juu ye enɛ a ye ŋfìŋ.	"I went with him at the ""Nwarong"" society and he was sent away under the pretext that he was an uninitiated member."
Pitaè aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Yáê, weèr aè maè'shi yeèr buu wááwá, a vú fa wáâ mbuèu.”	"Peter began to tell him, ""Behold, we have left all, and have followed you."""
E ka' laèasi woweèe, a ko' mbe rtuèu mimñgi' aè rgeèe rloo. AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr e ku bii mbo mimñgi'.	After he had sent the multitudes away, he went up into the mountain by himself to pray. When evening had come, he was there alone.
Woweèe a ker bipshi neè ye enáê, “Baná a wáè nda seê? Suñ weèr njáèá ñwáè ce aè yu tá weèr bo kúti suñ beèe ce a ba tuu weèr.”	"They said therefore to him, ""Who are you? Give us an answer to take back to those who sent us. What do you say about yourself?"""
Broñ mbaèa yu mñgaèñ efa buu bbebep wááwá. Beèe mo' a koèñ aè rtúr mbaèa seê, a ka' ce koèñ wa'a, a da' njïì rbyemïì, a ce señ ba buu, wap ntee vi ce fa woweèe ñgá'.	For the love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. Some have been led astray from the faith in their greed, and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
E tʉʉ ye nè dʉ̀ʼ.	He hit him with a fist.
E ku ce tàa mɛ̀ enɛ mɛ̀ m dù ntaa a bʉsi zhii mbàa.	She is blaming me that I went to the market and misplaced her money.
Woweèe a laa ená Jasïìn ba bfúr ca a tee yap tu. Jasïìn weèe a ka' tee yap tu aèmboè a m laèa, a ma'shïì woweèe a duseè.	When they had taken security from Jason and the rest, they let them go.
Ñgwañkúñwáè ce e yu ñgwañkúñwáè neè mini-ñwáè, a ke' túr ñwáè ce e ja' ye ka', yu ñgwañkúñwáè ce e láè mi mmir mbenduè Nyúè a ce loo neè ye aè nfeè' wááwá ená e ja' ye.	Now she who is a widow indeed, and desolate, has her hope set on God, and continues in petitions and prayers night and day.
Wèr ye à tʉr boo a baa baa, banɛ wèr ye à ròŋni.	He and I have two children each, so we are even.
Blaèa ce vi ce fúú eku waâp bcuèu vi ce vúè neè rkwe neè beèe ce a yu' blaèa anaè. Wap blaèa vi yu aèmboè nli' nyo ce yi ke yú ñwáè naè.	"Their throat is an open tomb. With their tongues they have used deceit. ""The poison of vipers is under their lips;"""
Nïìkoèdámoès aè m ba moè' efa múè beèe Farïìsïî, a ye ce e m be du yá Jisoès naè. E m laèa neè woweèe enáê,	Nicodemus (he who came to him by night, being one of them) said to them,
Ñwáè ka' ce feè'shi, e fe'shïì ba blaâa Nyúè. Ñwáè ka' ce faè' neè beèe, e lor ñger ce Nyúè aè fa neè ye fa' aègho, tá beèe a bo kuè'si Nyúè aè buu wááwá ce weèe ce geèe njo' weèe yu beèe Jisos Kraêis. Bkuè' wááwá vi ba neè ye aè nfeè' sïìp, ñger wááwá yi ba neè ye aè nfeè' sïìp foñ. Yi yu wa'a.	If anyone speaks, let it be as it were the very words of God. If anyone serves, let it be as of the strength which God supplies, that in all things God may be glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom belong the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen.
Wèe à lɛ̀ mŋwàʼ bvii ba fɛ?	Where have you kept his books?
A sañ mbe ñwaè' AÈsayaè ce ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè enáê, “M be tuu ya ñwáè ntuu tá e du entombïì neè wáè, duè kupshi nduunjïì neè wáè.	"As it is written in the prophets, ""Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you."
Mgʉr mmee mi yɛ̀ɛŋger e.	Your oil has melted.
Bkar waê, weèe fa ce báèáñger njo' rmoèoshïì ce li ce toèoshi weèe aèmboè mor na, aèmboè yu lá yuu ce yi búèú weèe wa' ka'.	Beloved, don't be astonished at the fiery trial which has come upon you, to test you, as though a strange thing happened to you.
Alir tʉr muu mbebò.	Alice has a child that she is still nursing.
Beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir mo' ce a m vúâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m vú aè ryá Jisoès.	Then the Pharisees, and some of the scribes gathered together to him, having come from Jerusalem.
Weèe aè maè' ncir Nyúè a lor ba ndeèe to'.”	For you set aside the commandment of God, and hold tightly to the tradition of men--the washing of pitchers and cups, and you do many other such things.
À tʉr mbʉ sɛʼ?	How many goats do you have?
Ñwáè ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m fúú enjep ye naè aè bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená a ye a duê. Jisoès aè kanïì, a laa neè ye enáê,	But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him that he might go with him, but Jesus sent him away, saying,
Máè geèe woweèe a riñ lo rlii. M be kuè ce geèe wa'a tá lo rkoèñnïì ce wáè túr neè máè li ba njep woweèe, tá m ba njep woweèe foñ.”	"I made known to them your name, and will make it known; that the love with which you loved me may be in them, and I in them."""
E ka' yá Jisoès wa'a, a bipshi ku' buu neè ye, e laa yuu ka'.	He questioned him with many words, but he gave no answers.
Weèe ku bii yu' rboèñ aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na. Ñko'ndoñ yu a weâe mú, ñgaèpni yi ba a weâe mú, baná mboè weèe ku bii yu' rboèñ aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na a? Mboè ye ñgeèe yi ku ba aèmboè yi beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a?	for you are still fleshly. For insofar as there is jealousy, strife, and factions among you, aren't you fleshly, and don't you walk in the ways of men?
Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, Nyúè fa weèe rfúteè ce li caèa bfee ñwáè, ba rfúteè ce li be ba njep weâe mntee ba njep weâe mkwaè'shïì njobeè' weèe yu aèbee weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe.	And the peace of God, which surpasses all understanding, will guard your hearts and your thoughts in Christ Jesus.
Caè'ni neè Prïûskaè ba AÈkwilaè ce weèr woweèe aè m faè' aèbee neè Jisos Kraâis naè neè máè.	Greet Prisca and Aquila, my fellow workers in Christ Jesus,
Rraa mini ce li ke raa mbenduè beèe wááwá naè li m vúè njep ñgoèñ.	The true light that enlightens everyone was coming into the world.
A kaʼ koo nzhɛ̀ɛ banɛ a ba bùu ye tɛ e war.	If a thief is caught, he will be jeered until he cries.
Ñwáè ce yú' bebep ca yi m ba njep ye na aè gwe mbe waâp nduè, a lip woweèe seê, a gha' woweèe. Woweèe a cañ a fúú embe ndaèp mbuèuriñ neè mnfur aè nyoèr.	The man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overpowered them, and prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and wounded.
: It specialises in begging.	It is usually dressed in leaves.
Wɛ̀ koni yuu wɛ̀ ba ce rò a?	Did you have what you wanted?
Yïì masaè aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘AÈ yu ñwáè rfaè' ce mbembep. M be loèr nlaèa ce yi fúú ekuè wáâ cuèu na, sa' wáè aègho. Wáè m yi wáná a máè ñwáâ ntatap ce má ke yá yuu ce ñwáâ jáá aè láè ku loêr, máâ yá yuu ce ñwáâ jáá aè byeè ku kep.	"He said to him, 'Out of your own mouth will I judge you, you wicked servant! You knew that I am an exacting man, taking up that which I didn't lay down, and reaping that which I didn't sow.
Luke	Luêk	19	23	Wáè m ka' baè rïìñ wa'a, a ke' duè neè ya mbaèa duè láè njep baêñ, máâ vúè tá m bo koo ya mbaèa neè sá'-ñwáè ka' njoká?’	Then why didn't you deposit my money in the bank, and at my coming, I might have earned interest on it?'
Luke	Luêk	19	24	E ka' laèa wa'a, a laa neè beèe ce a m táá a yeâ geñ enáê, ‘Koo neè ncúèkïì anaè ese ye, fa neè ñwáè ce e túr ncúèkïì rúú naè.’	He said to those who stood by, 'Take the mina away from him, and give it to him who has the ten minas.'
Luke	Luêk	19	25	Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Masaè, e túr ncúèkïì rúú wáá.’	They said to him, 'Lord, he has ten minas!'"
Weèe rïìñ yuu ce yi be ba aèyaèñseè ka'. Le ryoèñ li yu aèmboè mmbaè' ce vi yááti, nfeè' múcaèr vi bú naè.	Whereas you don't know what your life will be like tomorrow. For what is your life? For you are a vapor, that appears for a little time, and then vanishes away.
Máèári ye ye aè m ce kuushi buu ca a ce kwaè'shi aèmboè vi.	But Mary kept all these sayings, pondering them in her heart.
E m ker laa enáê, “Kúú Nyúè yi yu aè njáèá enáê, yi yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e m byeè kwaa aè múè nsuu.	"He said, ""The Kingdom of God is as if a man should cast seed on the earth,"
Pailáèt aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè ñgaâa rkeè'nïì ca tá weèe woweèe duê, du yá ená woweèe a keè'ni rsheè anaè boèñboñ.”	"Pilate said to them, ""You have a guard. Go, make it as secure as you can."""
E ka' koo ye, a fa ye mbe shañ. E m fa ye mbaè mmbo bsoogáè ce a m ba bkúr kyeèe, bsoogáè a ba mbe kúr e mo'sir beèe ñkyeèe, a ce keè'ni ye. E m ce kwaè'shi ená a be ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap tá e ka' fúr ye, sa' aè múè beèe.	When he had arrested him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four squads of four soldiers each to guard him, intending to bring him out to the people after the Passover.
Yuu ce yi yu lulu seê, yi yu ená weèe koñ beèe, njobeè' rkoèñnïì a yuu ce yi kur buu ca wááwá aèbee, tá weèe bo ba aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ ená weèe ba.	Above all these things, walk in love, which is the bond of perfection.
Tata Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Duè yo yu. E yu yaè ñwáè ce máè ce tá e bo suñ aèmboè la rlii neè beèe enje jáá, ba bkúú, ker ba boo Isráèl.	"But the Lord said to him, ""Go your way, for he is my chosen vessel to bear my name before the nations and kings, and the children of Israel."
Yuu ghagha' ca a ncoèo embenjïì ce Jisoès aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce e m loâ aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a kúti aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	This is again the second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.
Loo neè neè bkúú ba beèe wááwá ce a ce sa' beèe tá seèe bo cu neè cumúnyañ- ñwáè, tá ñgá' ba ka', cu ba rcu ce Nyúè koèñ, ba beâe byáánïì aè bsii beèe aè buu wááwá.	for kings and all who are in high places; that we may lead a tranquil and quiet life in all godliness and reverence.
Baná aède' m naatu aè rfaè' ce máè geèe neè Nyúè njobeè' weèr Jisos Kraâis yu aèbee.	I have therefore my boasting in Christ Jesus in things pertaining to God.
Fa mɛ̀ la rbì.	Give my kola.
Kuushi neè yuu ce yi m ba aè nfeè' ce weèe aè m káè' a yá rraa Nyúè naè. Ka' weèe aè m yá ñgá' aè nfeè' anaè se wa'a, weèe aè m ku kur ntee a táá tatap.	But remember the former days, in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings;
Nsee zhi ce koo mɛ̀ nè ye sê.	I am very sorry for him.
Bèe moʼ a koŋ làanyʉ̀ ce zhi sàp sê.	Some people like very long sermons.
Fa bo' yo tu, loèr Nyúè aè lúr ka'. Yuu ce ñwáè aè byeè ku ba yuu ce e be kep.	Don't be deceived. God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows, that he will also reap.
Ñwáè wááwá ce a baèptir ye, a Jisos Kraâis a ba aèbee, ñwáè anaè aè loèr ba ñgeèe Jisos Kraêis.	For as many of you as were baptized into Christ have put on Christ.
Buu vi yuâ btaar ce vi be cu. Mo' yu rbyemïì, mo' aè ba rkeè' ce seèe ce keè' ená Nyúè gee yuu ce e m kaè', mo' aè ba rkoèñnïì. Yuu goèr efa múè buu ca yu rkoèñnïì.	But now faith, hope, and love remain--these three. The greatest of these is love.
a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñger ce aè ce geèe buu ca aègho yi loè efá? Ñwáè ce e fa wáè ñger ca aè fa nda?”	"They asked him, ""Tell us: by what authority do you do these things? Or who is giving you this authority?"""
Woweèe a lap ñgaâa ñkoo nca mo' ce a m ba mbe keñ moè' naè ená woweèe a vú ja' woweèe. Woweèe a vú a ja' woweèe, a woweèe a koo nca yi ruu aè bkeñ bbaa anaè jiñ, keñ aè ce sáni niñ njep múè roè.	They beckoned to their partners in the other boat, that they should come and help them. They came, and filled both boats, so that they began to sink.
Woweèe a ka' baè' aètútú rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a ba aè rla' Bátáfáè ker ba aè rla' Bátanïì, ce mi m ba aègee rtuèu Oleèf. Jisoès aè tuu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a baa,	When they drew near to Jerusalem, to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the Mount of Olives, he sent two of his disciples,
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ ce Lot aè m fúú aè rla' Sodoèm, mor ba bluâr mor vi she a suu embe buèu aèmboè mbeèñ e ke gweè naè, a yúshi woweèe wááwá.	but in the day that Lot went out from Sodom, it rained fire and sulfur from the sky, and destroyed them all.
“Ñgoèñ ca yi ka' baa weèe, rïìñ neè ená yi m baa máè entombïû neè weèe.	If the world hates you, you know that it has hated me before it hated you.
Weèe yu nyor Jisos Kraêis, ñwáè wááwá aè ba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor anaè.	Now you are the body of Christ, and members individually.
Woweèe a ka' ce ye byee, Jisoès aè lor bráêd, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa enáê, “Koè neè ye, ca yu yaè nyor.”	"As they were eating, Jesus took bread, gave thanks for it, and broke it. He gave to the disciples, and said, ""Take, eat; this is my body."""
Seèe túr dïì' ce a geèe tañshïì mbo neè seèe. Ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a ke faè' ba mbe Tabáènakuèr naè, a túr ñger aè rye yuu embe dïì' tañshïì yiseèe na ka'.	We have an altar from which those who serve the holy tabernacle have no right to eat.
Pitaè ba Joân a beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Kwaè'shi ka neè boèñboñ ená yi yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ená weèr yu'ni ba neè weèe káè neè Nyúè lá?	"But Peter and John answered them, ""Whether it is right in the sight of God to listen to you rather than to God, judge for yourselves,"
Máè beesïì a laa neè ye mánáê, “Masaè, ñwáè ce e rïìñ yu ba wáè.” E laa neè máè enáê, “Beèe ca yu beèe ce a fúú efa ku' ñgá' ce e caèa ñger. Woweèe a suè'si wap bcáè' neè bláá Muu Njeèe, vi ce fúp.	"I told him, ""My lord, you know."" He said to me, ""These are those who came out of the great tribulation. They washed their robes, and made them white in the Lamb's blood."
E m kwe yïìseèe boo-bïìr aè nfeè' ce a m taa ye mbe kïìntaa naè, tá seèe bo keèr ce geèe buu bbebep ka', cu ce geèe ba buu byáánïì. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' a m báási ye, seèe aè luêñ.	who his own self bore our sins in his body on the tree, that we, having died to sins, might live to righteousness; by whose stripes you were healed.
Mluè mi koo ñkúú seê, aè ka' ba njobeè' e m ye leè' aè bsii beèe ce a m vúè ñkaè' naè, e moo aè rsheè laèr.	The king was exceedingly sorry, but for the sake of his oaths, and of his dinner guests, he didn't wish to refuse her.
M ̀ ce jʉ̀p mbàŋ.	I am cracking palm nuts.
Woowèe a ce wɛɛ nyàanjip.	They are hunting cutting- grass.
Mboè Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa ená Kraâis anaè be ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Dávïìd, ba ñwáâ aè rla' Bátáèláèhám ce yu rla' Dávïìd a?”	"Hasn't the Scripture said that the Christ comes of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?"""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè yá ku' buu bboèñboñ ce máè geèe aè rlii yaè Taê. Efa múè buu ca, weèe ce koèñ aè rtúúshi máè neè bluèr ba aètu yïì efá?”	"Jesus answered them, ""I have shown you many good works from my Father. For which of those works do you stone me?"""
Woweèe a ka' ba ñgaâa mfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis, baná máè gha' woweèe. (M ce laèa seè'ni aèmboè ñgaèabaa wa'a.) Máè faè' a caa woweèe, a du shañ a caa woweèe, beèe a lïìp máè a caa woweèe, rkwe li rúèú máè a nfyeènyú nfeè' aèñgoo.	Are they servants of Christ? (I speak as one beside himself) I am more so; in labors more abundantly, in prisons more abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths often.
Máè ka' loo wa'a, Tata aè beesïì enáê, “Ya ñger ce máè fa neè wáè yi ghááte yi ba aè rjaè' wáè tá aè cu neè yuu anaè nje nyoèr. Ya ñger yi ce yááti boèñboñ ba njep ñwáè ce e goè'si.” Baná m be yu' nyor neè wa bgoè'sïì neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè tá ñger Jisos Kraâis yi bo ba mbe máâ nduè.	"He has said to me, ""My grace is sufficient for you, for my power is made perfect in weakness."" Most gladly therefore I will rather glory in my weaknesses, that the power of Christ may rest on me."
Woweèe a byemïì yuu ce máè m suñ woweèe anaè. Ka' Taitoès ce weèr woweèe aè m vúè naè aè m ba ñwáâ aè to' Greâs wa'a, a m taèa ye ená e geèe búè ka'.	But not even Titus, who was with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised.
Nyo à luu mɛ̀ à bo ŋkòp.	A snake bit me on the left hand.
Máè m naèa tu neè Taitoès njo' weèe, weèe a ke' coosi máè ka'. AÈmboè yuu wááwá ce weèr aè m suñ weèe yi m ba mini naè, buu ce weèr ce naèa tu aègho neè Taitoès njo' weèe naè, aè yáátïì mini foñ.	For if in anything I have boasted to him on your behalf, I was not disappointed. But as we spoke all things to you in truth, so our glorying also which I made before Titus was found to be truth.
Nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè aè du a táá aèwaâa rdip rgoèr.	nan
Buu wááwá ce wáè m yu' aèmboè m ce yá'ni beèe naè, loèr vi fa mbaè mmbo beèe ce wáè rïìñ ená a yu mini, a riñ foñ ená woweèe a ghááte aè ryá'ni beèe mo'.	The things which you have heard from me among many witnesses, commit the same to faithful men, who will be able to teach others also.
Beèe wááwá embe ndaèp rloo a ka' yu' wa'a, nyor aè bep woweèe seê.	They were all filled with wrath in the synagogue, as they heard these things.
E m duè foñ aè rla' Nasaráèt faèdïì' ce e m kuè'. AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, e du mbe ndaèp rloo aèmboè e m ce duè aè nfeè' wááwá naè. A ka' baè' mbo, a nati mbekïì aè rbeè' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè.	He came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up. He entered, as was his custom, into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up to read.
“Wáâ yeèr Tata Nyúè, wáè ghááte aè ñwáè ce beèe a ba kuè'si wáè, náèsi wáè, a ker ghááte aè rtúr ñger wááwá, njobeè' a wáè ce wáè m geèe buu wááwá, a kwa'shi ená buu anaè ba aègho.”	Worthy are you, our Lord and God, the Holy One, to receive the glory, the honor, and the power, for you created all things, and because of your desire they existed, and were created!
Weèe ce geèe ba yuu ce yeè ta ce geèe.” Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr yu boo ce a bi aè bsaèkïì ka'. Yeèr ta ku ba Nyúè caè'caè'.”	"You do the works of your father."" They said to him, ""We were not born of sexual immorality. We have one Father, God."""
Woweèe a ka' keè' a yá aèmboè ku' bcïìndap Nyúè a vúè, a kyese nyor aègee ncïìndap Nyúè caè, a ce kuè'si Nyúè, a ce laèa enáê,	Suddenly, there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly army praising God, and saying,
Woweèe a ka' ye byee mïìsi wáá, Jisoès aè laa neè Saimún Pitaè enáê, “Saimúèn, muu Joân, wáè koèñ máè a caa beèe ca a?” Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “ÁÈno Tataê, aè rïìñ wáná m koèñ wáè.” E laa neè ye enáê, “Nyañ ya njeèe.”	"So when they had eaten their breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter, ""Simon, son of Jonah, do you love me more than these?"" He said to him, ""Yes, Lord; you know that I have affection for you."" He said to him, ""Feed my lambs."""
E m yɛʼni àmbò a ke baʼ ŋkàa ese mɛ̀.	She learned basket weaving from me.
AÈ ka' ba aèlúèsimbuèu, Pailáèt aè boñlaèr a fa ye neè woweèe tá a bo taa ye mbe kïìntaa. Woweèe a m koo Jisoès a du aègho.	So then he delivered him to them to be crucified. So they took Jesus and led him away.
a laa enáê, ‘Beèe ca a ku ce yu'ni neè máè ba neè cuèu, yap ntee yi ba aènjïìsaèp ese máè.	These people draw near to me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips; but their heart is far from me.
aè ba buu ce viseèe mntáâ' ncoèp baa-aè-rrúèú a ce loo neè Nyúè neètú' ba neèmootïì, a ce keè' foñ ená a be koni vi. Taèr Mañgoèñ, yu njobeè' rbyemïì ca ce ená Jus a loèr máè aè mnsa'.	which our twelve tribes, earnestly serving night and day, hope to attain. Concerning this hope I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa!
Vi loè foñ ese Jisos Kraâis ce e ke suñ buu ce vi yu mini, a ba ñwáè ce e m fúú efa rkwe entombïì, a ker ba ñwáè ce e ce sa' bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá. M ce yoèñshi ye ce e m koèñ seèe, a kwe a seâe btuè a fúr seèe efa buu bbebep neè vi bláá.	and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us, and washed us from our sins by his blood;
Yú' Rara yi ka' tuu woweèe, woweèe a natïì a du aè rla' Sáèlushaè, a loâ aèfo a niñ mbe keñ a du aè to' Saiproès.	So, being sent out by the Holy Spirit, they went down to Seleucia. From there they sailed to Cyprus.
Ŋwɛ̀ ce e ke kɛ̀r mbèŋ e ke ba ŋwɛ̀ fii.	A person who causes rain to fall is a magician.
E ba ba ñwáè ce e yu mmbo mtoo, a ba ñwáè ce e koèñ ba yuu boèñboñ. E ba ñwáè ce e be kwaè'shi buu neè bfee-ñwáè, ba ñwáè nyáánïì, ba ñwáè nrara aè bsii Nyúè, ker ba ñwáè ce e maè'shi yïì nyor aèwaèa ka'.	but given to hospitality, a lover of good, sober minded, fair, holy, self-controlled;
Pailáèt aè laa neè beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ku' beèe ce a m ba aèfo naè enáê, “Máè yá yuu mo' ce m taa ñwáè ca aètu mo ka'.”	"Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, ""I find no basis for a charge against this man."""
Wá vúè aè túr kur ce máè m láè neè Kapoès aè rla' Trowaès, ker ba wa mñwaè', lañlañ wa mñwaâ' bboèñboñ caè.	Bring the cloak that I left at Troas with Carpus when you come, and the books, especially the parchments.
Byèŋge bwer à dùse ŋwàʼ.	Our women have gone to school.
Nyúè e sañ aè mjáá, mi yuushi, fúèlawaè efa gho yi karnger, gwe aè nshe, li rboèñ li bú aè cicïì. A mboè yi yu neè ñwáè mbaèa wa'a; yi ntaè'teè e ce duè kuèntombïì, e kwe, bár buu anaè.	For the sun arises with the scorching wind, and withers the grass, and the flower in it falls, and the beauty of its appearance perishes. So also will the rich man fade away in his pursuits.
E yu ñwáè ce a sañ aèmboè ye mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Yáê, m be tuu yaè ñwáè ntuu tá e du entombïì neè wáè, duè kupshi nduunjïì neè wáè.’	This is he of whom it is written, 'Behold, I send my messenger before your face, who will prepare your way before you.'
Tata aè karsïì nyor a ke' ye mbe mmïìr. E ka' kuushi yuu ce e m laèa neè ye enáê, “Tá nduñgúp ka' toñ neètú' e ntïìni na, aè be kani ñkaèraè' taar ená aè rïìñ máè ka'.” naè.	"The Lord turned, and looked at Peter. Then Peter remembered the Lord's word, how he said to him, ""Before the rooster crows you will deny me three times."""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná Nyúè be keèe foèosi buu bbebep ce beèe a m geèe, ka' buu bbebep ce woweèe a laèa.	Most certainly I tell you, all sins of the descendants of man will be forgiven, including their blasphemies with which they may blaspheme;
Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “Abraèham yu yeèr taê.” Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè ba ba boo Abraèhaêm, weèe aè ba geèe ba buu ce Abraèham aè m ce geèe.	"They answered him, ""Our father is Abraham."" Jesus said to them, ""If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham."
Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' wa blaèa, láê, baná a ñwáè ce e koèñ máè. Ñwáè aè ka' koñ máè baná yaè Ta be koèñ ñgaèñ foñ. M be koèñ ñwáè anaè foñ, duèñshi yaè nyor neè ye.”	"One who has my commandments, and keeps them, that person is one who loves me. One who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will reveal myself to him."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Njeñwáè, aè ce war ba ká? AÈ ce roèo ba nda?” Máèári aè m ce kwaè'shi ená a ye ñwáè ñka' anaè, a laa neè ye enáê, “Yaè Taê, ka' ba ená aè loèr wáè a lor ye a du aègho, aè suñ máè faèdïì' ce wáè loèr ye a láê, tá m bo duè loèr.”	"Jesus said to her, ""Woman, why are you weeping? Who are you looking for?"" She, supposing him to be the gardener, said to him, ""Sir, if you have carried him away, tell me where you have laid him, and I will take him away."""
M ce wáp máná m be vúè yá weèe, tá weèe ba jáá efa yuu ce m ce kwaè'shi, tá má máè ba jáá efa yuu ce weèe ce kwaè'shi. M ce wáp máná m be vúè baè' tá mlap ba ñko'ndoñ ba mshentee ba ñgaèpni ba mbepsi beèe, ba mnsa'ni, ba naèanyor ker ba bjep vi ba fa weâe mú.	For I am afraid that by any means, when I come, I might find you not the way I want to, and that I might be found by you as you don't desire; that by any means there would be strife, jealousy, outbursts of anger, factions, slander, whisperings, proud thoughts, riots;
Weèe rïìñ ená máè m buu efa rsuñ weèe yuu mo' ce aède' weèe aè m ba ye sá' enjo ka'. Máè m ce feè'shi, a ker ce yá'ni weèe aè múè beèe ker ba aè mndaèp.	how I didn't shrink from declaring to you anything that was profitable, teaching you publicly and from house to house,
Yi boèñ ená weèe aè ba yá weèr aèmboè ñgaâa mfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis. Weèe aè ba rïìñ ená Nyúè aè m loèr buu ce vi yu aè bsúèti a fa mba weâr mmboè ená weèr yá'ni beèe.	So let a man think of us as Christ's servants, and stewards of God's mysteries.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Beèe enje jáá a ce bepsi rlii Nyúè njobeè' yuu ce weèe ce geèe.”	"For ""the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you,"" just as it is written."
Woweèe a ka' yu', ntee yi bep woweèe seê, woweèe a kúr msoèñ.	Now when they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they gnashed at him with their teeth.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a joo tuè' ñwáè anaè, yi kútïì aèmboè yi m ba.	"But Jesus answered, ""Let me at least do this""--and he touched his ear, and healed him."
Yi yu ená mñgúè' nyor vi yu jáá jáèá jáá wa'a, nyor aè ku ba moè'sir.	But now they are many members, but one body.
Sataèn aè ker lor ye a du aègho mbe rtuèu ce li m saèp seê, a duñshi ye bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na, ker ba ku' buu bboèñboñ enjo,	Again, the devil took him to an exceedingly high mountain, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world, and their glory.
A m teni rum yïì enje mú ba neè cáè'. A m too rum yïì anaè ená, Dïû' rara ce yi caèa ñger.	After the second veil was the tabernacle which is called the Holy of Holies,
“Máè láè cumúnyañ neè weèe, m ce fa yaè cumúnyañ neè weèe. M ce fa ba aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ke fa ka'. Weèe fa maè'shi tá wee mntee vi ce fa weèe ñgá' ka'. Weèe fa wáp buu ka'.	Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you; not as the world gives, give I to you. Don't let your heart be troubled, neither let it be fearful.
Rbuu ba nshe a be keè mïì, geewa'a, wa blaèa vi be keè mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will by no means pass away.
M ce kúsi ye ce e yu wa mntee neè wáè.	I am sending him back. Therefore receive him, that is, my own heart,
ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa aègho naè. Yi laèa enáê, “Yáê, m ce láè luèr aè rla' Sayoèn, ce e be geèe tá beèe a kote. Luèr anaè be geèe tá woweèe a gweñger. Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè ye, m ke coosi ñgaèñ ka'.”	"even as it is written, ""Behold, I lay in Zion a stumbling stone and a rock of offense; and no one who believes in him will be disappointed."""
A ka' beèesi wa'a, e joo map mmir neè mmbo, a laa enáê, “Tá yi ku ba neè weèe aèmboè weèe aè byemi ená yi be ba naè.”	"Then he touched their eyes, saying, ""According to your faith be it done to you."""
E m cu aè múè beâe bbebep ca, a ce yá buu bbebep ce woweèe a m ce geèe aè mnoèñ wááwá, a ker ce yu' buu bbebep ce woweèe a m ce laèa. Ntee yi m yañ ye se njobeè' e m ce geèe ñgeâe yáánïì.	(for that righteous man dwelling among them, was tormented in his righteous soul from day to day with seeing and hearing lawless deeds):
“Fa wáp neè ka', mú ya njeèe, njobeè' yeè Ta ce yu' rboèñ se aè rfa weèe kúú anaè.	Don't be afraid, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
E m loèr ñger nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè a túr nfur ce e m keè'se wáá naè a gee buu aègho aè rlii nyaèa anaè. E m geèe beèe enjep ñgoèñ wááwá a gú'shïì neè nyaèa anaè.	He exercises all the authority of the first beast in his presence. He makes the earth and those who dwell in it to worship the first beast, whose fatal wound was healed.
AÈlajaè ce e m ku ba ñwáè aèmboè seèe aè m loo tatap ená mbeèñ fa gweè ka'. Nyúè aè m yu' li rloo, mbeèñ aè ke' gwe ka' aè bfeâ' btaar ba mñwáá ntuunfu.	Elijah was a man with a nature like ours, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it didn't rain on the earth for three years and six months.
Pol aè beesïì enáê, “Bfúr waê, máè ba riñ ená a tu ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ka'. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Fa laèa yuu bebep kuèu ñwáè ce e ce sa' yoè beèe ka'.’ ”	"Paul said, ""I didn't know, brothers, that he was high priest. For it is written, 'You shall not speak evil of a ruler of your people.'"""
Wèr ye yu cǔumoʼsir.	I am in agreement with him.
Ñwáè ce e koèñ beèe ka', rïìñ Nyúè ka', njobeè' Nyúè yu rkoèñnïì.	He who doesn't love doesn't know God, for God is love.
Jɛ̀r arghuuntaa mtùu anà a be niŋ àfo.	Walk along that range of hills and you will get there.
Máè táá mbena seè'ni aè mnsa' njobeè' máè byemi, a ce keè' buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè viseèe btaê,	Now I stand here to be judged for the hope of the promise made by God to our fathers,
E m loè a yañ, a kwe. A ka' suè'si ye, a lá mbe rum ndaèp yïì embekïì.	It happened in those days that she fell sick, and died. When they had washed her, they laid her in an upper room.
Weèr ce gheèter aè rgeèe ba yuu ce yi yu boèñboñ aè bsii Tataê, ker ba aè bsii beèe foñ.	Having regard for honorable things, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
Beèe mo' efa woweèe a m byemi, a ba aèbee a Pol ba Silaès. Beèe magoèr efa múè Greâk ce a m ce loo neè Nyúè ker ba bbyeèñge ce a m ba ñgaâa mlii a m byemi foñ a ba aèbee a Pol weèe.	Some of them were persuaded, and joined Paul and Silas, of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and not a few of the chief women.
Pitaè aè kanïì, a laa enáê, “Njeñwáè caê, m rïìñ ye ka'.”	"He denied Jesus, saying, ""Woman, I don't know him."""
M ce laèa neè weèe ce weèe rïìñ buu. Weèe kwa'shi ka ená yuu ce m ce laèa neè weèe yi yu mini lá.	I speak as to wise men. Judge what I say.
Jisoès aè ka' baè' aè rla' Bátanïì, a yu' ená yu mnoèñ kyeèe aèmboè a mú tuñ Lasoèroès.	So when Jesus came, he found that he had been in the tomb four days already.
Cena yi ce duèñshi ená yu boo wááwá ce Abraèham aè m bi ce a yu boo Nyúè ka'; yu ba boo ce a m bi njo' mñkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m geèe neè Abraèham ce a ce beè' aè boo Abraèhaêm.	That is, it is not the children of the flesh who are children of God, but the children of the promise are counted as a seed.
Ñger mnyaèabaèraè' anaè yi m ba ku waâp cuèu, a ker ba aè wap mñkuèñ. Wap mñkuèñ vi m ba aèmboè mnyo, a túr btuè'. Vi tashïì beèe ba neè mñkuèñ anaè.	For the power of the horses is in their mouths, and in their tails. For their tails are like serpents, and have heads, and with them they harm.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè entombïì ce a m too ená Adaèm naè aè m beèeñger aè yuu teèe.” Adaèm embenjïì ce yu Adaèm elúèsimbuèu yu yi ba yú' ce yi ke fa beèe ryoèñ.	"So also it is written, ""The first man, Adam, became a living soul."" The last Adam became a life-giving spirit."
Saèkaèriyaè aè laa neè ncïìndap Nyúè anaè enáê, “Máè rúèú seê, ñgwa waè foñ aè rúêú. AÈtaè m riñ neè ká ená yuu ce aè ce laèa na yi be ba mini?”	"Zacharias said to the angel, ""How can I be sure of this? For I am an old man, and my wife is well advanced in years."""
Rjɛ̀r ca rli lɛʼsi mɛ̀.	This journey has surprised me.
Mɛ̀ dù a lor nè yaa bo.	I went and took it myself.
Ka' ba aè nfeè' ce mbañruèñwáè ce geèe rloo, ker ba aè nfeè' ce e ce cep ntuu Nyúè, e ka' sop rtaa mbe tuè baná e coosi Jisos Kraâis ce e yu tu neè ye.	Every man praying or prophesying, having his head covered, dishonors his head.
E bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè mú tuñ ye ba fá?” Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, vúè yá.”	"and said, ""Where have you laid him?"" They told him, ""Lord, come and see."""
Ka' Maikáèl ce e yu tu neè bcïìndap naè, e m laèa bebep neè Sataèn aè nfeè' ce a ye a m ce sár mnsár aèmboè gúâú Musïìs naè ka'. E m laèa ba enáê, “Tá Nyúè lapni wáè.”	"But Michael, the archangel, when contending with the devil and arguing about the body of Moses, dared not bring against him an abusive condemnation, but said, ""May the Lord rebuke you!"""
Ñwáè moè' ka' laa enáê, “M koèñ Nyúè,” baa nfúr yïì, baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè mnde' njobeè' ñwáè ka' baa nfúr yïì ce e ce yá, aède' e koñ Nyúè ce e ce yá ka' aè njáâá ká?	"If a man says, ""I love God,"" and hates his brother, he is a liar; for he who doesn't love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?"
Jisoès aè ciisïì neè woweèe ená a fa suñ ñwáè ka'. E ka' cïìisi wa'a woweèe a misïì a suñ beèe goèr.	He commanded them that they should tell no one, but the more he commanded them, so much the more widely they proclaimed it.
Fa luu ye kaʼ.	Donʼt bite him.
Wowèe a gwè ncir toʼ.	They have violated the village law.
E be geèe tá weèe túr buu goèr aè nfeè' wááwá, ba mmbo mtoo a nfeè' wááwá tá beèe magoèr a bo yoèñshi Nyúè njo' le rfa ce woweèe a ce koo ese weèr.	you being enriched in everything to all liberality, which works through us thanksgiving to God.
Fa weèr byee aè mnoèñ wááwá.	Give us day by day our daily bread.
Jáásïì aè m bi ñkúú Dávïìd. Dávïìd aè bi Solomúèn ce yïì ma aè m ba ñgwa Yurïìyaè naè,	Jesse became the father of King David. David became the father of Solomon by her who had been the wife of Uriah.
Bee moʼ a ku koŋ yap ba à rnoŋger à mndap buu.	Some people prefer only to be drinking in drinking societies.
Buu bbebep aèmboè aè ryú ñwáè, koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè', bsaèkïì, byáèá, táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ, laa yuu bebep kuu ñwáè moè', yu buu ce beèe a ke kwaè'shi aè rgeèe ba enjep ntee.	For out of the heart come forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, sexual sins, thefts, false testimony, and blasphemies.
Baná aè tuu beèe aè rla' Jopaè tá woweèe a du vúè neè Saimúèn ce li rlii mo' li yu ená Pitaè naè. E ce cu mbe ndaèp mbe Saimúèn ñwáè yaati mñguâp nyaèa, ndap anaè aè ba aèwaâa rdip rgoèr.’	Send therefore to Joppa, and summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter. He lodges in the house of Simon a tanner, by the seaside. When he comes, he will speak to you.'
Nfeè' aè gháá ce woweèe a be duèñshi lap rshentee. Ñwáè ce e be túr ñger aè rjaè' yi tu a nda?”	"for the great day of his wrath has come; and who is able to stand?"""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Baná ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ce laèa ená AÈlajaè be vúè entoèmbïì njoká?”	"His disciples asked him, saying, ""Then why do the scribes say that Elijah must come first?"""
Mbuèu moè' aè m ker ba ená nyúè ce e ke sañ na ba ñwáá a sañ aè rla' anaè ka', njobeè' rraa Nyúè li m ce sañ aèfo, muu njeèe aè ba lam efa rla' anaè.	The city has no need for the sun, neither of the moon, to shine, for the very glory of God illuminated it, and its lamp is the Lamb.
Dávïìd aè ba muu Jáásïì, Jáásïì aè ba muu Obáèd, Obáèd aè ba muu Buwaès, Buwaès aè ba muu Salmoèn, Salmoèn aè ba muu Nashoèn,	the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
Beèe wááwá ce a m yu', a m báèáñger seê, a laa enáê, “Mboè ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce e m ce gheèter aè ryúshi beèe ce a m ce loo neè Jisoès aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm naè a? Mboè e vúè aèfa tá e bo keèr koshi ñgaâa rloo ca kur duè aègho duè fa neè beèe ce a yu btu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a?”	"All who heard him were amazed, and said, ""Isn't this he who in Jerusalem made havoc of those who called on this name? And he had come here intending to bring them bound before the chief priests!"""
Taanyʉ̀ à sɛpsi btotoʼ mbì.	Tanyu has divided the kola nut cotyledons.
E yaati mkuu mbe kwàrakwarà.	She dried beans on the mat.
Beèe a ce fa weèr ñgá', weèr aè ke' ba mer mñgi' ka'. Beèe a ce lïìp weèr, weèr aè ce gweèñger aè nsheè, a ke' ce kweñger ka'.	pursued, yet not forsaken; struck down, yet not destroyed;
Bfúr waê, yi boèñ ená beèe magoèr efa weâe mú a ba ñgaâa ryá'nïì ka', njobeè' Nyúè be keè sa' seèe ce seèe yu ñgaâa ryá'nïì tatap caèa beèe mo'.	Let not many of you be teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive heavier judgment.
E lamni muu enɛ e fa kèr koʼ mbe ce kaʼ.	He has warned the child not to climb up to the tree again.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Rraa li be kuè ba weèe woweèe ba aè nfeè' múcaècaèr. Ce jár neè seè'ni aèmboè rraa li bii aègho, faè dïì' túè'nji koni weèe ka'. Ñwáè ce e ke jáèr aè túè'nji e ke rïìñ faèdïì' ce e ce duè ka'.	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""Yet a little while the light is with you. Walk while you have the light, that darkness doesn't overtake you. He who walks in the darkness doesn't know where he is going."
E m laèa neè yïì nyor enáê, “M ka' ku joo ba yi cuèu cáè', m ku ke'se.”	"for she said within herself, ""If I just touch his garment, I will be made well."""
Baná weèe yu'ni neè woweèe, gee yuu ce woweèe a ce suñ weèe. Weèe fa geèe yuu ce woweèe a ce geèe ka' njobeè' woweèe a ke geèe yuu ce woweèe a ke feè'shi ka'.	All things therefore whatever they tell you to observe, observe and do, but don't do their works; for they say, and don't do.
E ke ba mbe nfeè' ce seèe ce yá njáèá ñgá' ca, seèe ce koosimnse, ke' ce lu'shi ka'. E ba embenjïì, beèe ce a yá'ni yuu efa njáèá ñgá' ca, a cu lap rcu neè rfúteè- ñwáè, gee ñgeâe yáánïì.	All chastening seems for the present to be not joyous but grievous; yet afterward it yields the peaceful fruit of righteousness to those who have been exercised thereby.
E ka' ñwañshi wáá a laa enáê, “Cena yu ba bláá ce vi kur leè' ce Nyúè aè ye weèe woweèe, a laa ená weèe gee yuu ce leè' yi laèa naè.”	"saying, ""This is the blood of the covenant which God has commanded you."""
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè Soêl, e m ker misi a tap, a ce naèshi ená Jisoès aè m ba Kraâis anaè. Cena yi gee bfee vi jep Jus ce a m ce cu aè rla' Daèmaskoès.	But Saul increased more in strength, and confounded the Jews who lived at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
Bèe moʼ a ke yɛ njeŋwɛ̀ nè bàasòŋ ku laa enɛ e boŋ.	When some people see a woman with a gap between the upper teeth, they say she is beautiful.
E m ká' woweèe a beèe ce a m ce geèe njáèá ntaa anaè foñ aèbee, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè beèe, weèe rïìñ ená see ke yeñger boèñboñ seê, njobeè' liseèe rfaè' ca.	"whom he gathered together, with the workmen of like occupation, and said, ""Sirs, you know that by this business we have our wealth."
Túè' aè ka' raa woweèe a suu embe rtuèu, ku' beèe a du aè ryá ye.	It happened on the next day, when they had come down from the mountain, that a great multitude met him.
Woweèe a ka' baè' mbe dïì' ce a m ce too ená Golgotaè, ce mbuèu efa rlii ca yu enáê, “Dïû' keèkeèp tu.”,	"They came to a place called ""Golgotha,"" that is to say, ""The place of a skull."""
AÈde' ñwáè moè' bipshïì enáê, “AÈde' beèe ce a kweñger a fúú efa rkwe aè njáâá ká? Woweèe a be fúú efa rkwe ba neè njáèá nyor ce e yu aè njáâá ká?”	"But someone will say, ""How are the dead raised?"" and, ""With what kind of body do they come?"""
Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tata aè m geèe yuu boèñboñ neè máè seê. E m geèe máè byemïì neè ye, a ker koñ beèe foñ. Jisos Kraâis e ke fa rbyemïì ca ba rkoèñnïì neè beèe ce a woweèe a yu ñwáè moè'sir.	The grace of our Lord abounded exceedingly with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus.
Nyɛ̀ɛ à ghùp buu embe ndàp wɛɛwɛ.	The thief has carried everything from the house.
Beèe anaè a m báèá li ryá'nïì njobeè' li m ba aèmboè li ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ka', li m túr ñger.	They were astonished at his teaching, for he taught them as having authority, and not as the scribes.
Máè laèa cena tá rïìtu yi bo koo weèe. Waè' ñwáè moè' ce e túr bfee yu a weâe mú ce mfúr moè' ka' túr mnsa' a nfúr moè', e sa' mnsa' anaè neè woweèe ka' a?	I say this to move you to shame. Isn't there even one wise man among you who would be able to decide between his brothers?
Weèe yu beèe ce weèr be naèa tu, keèr lu'shi aègho aè nfeè' anaè.	For you are our glory and our joy.
Baa cuŋ zhi ke gèe nyor luu wɛ̀.	Hot food makes you warm.
AÈde' ñwáè kanïì muu, ba a Taèr ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi muu baná ñgaèñ yu aè Taèr foñ.	Whoever denies the Son, the same doesn't have the Father. He who confesses the Son has the Father also.
“Muu ñgoèñgoè be ba neè rbúè, bi muu mbañruè tá a fa li rlii ená ÁÈmanuèwáèl.”	"Behold, the virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son. They shall call his name Immanuel; which is, being interpreted, ""God with us."""
Jisoès yu ñwáè ce beèe a ba kuè'si ye caèa Musïìs, aèmboè beèe a ke kuè'si ñwáè ce e baè'ri ndap caa ndap ce e baè'ri naè.	For he has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who built the house has more honor than the house.
Baná weèe ce laa buu, ker ce gee ñgeèe ba aèmboè beèe ce Nyúè be keè sa' weèe neè ncir ce yi maè'shi ñwáè aèwaèa aè rgeèe buu ce e koèñ.	So speak, and so do, as men who are to be judged by a law of freedom.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Bsïìi vi túr bto, bsiñ vi túr mndap, Muu Ñwáè aè ke' túr dïì' ce aède' e lá yi tu ka'.”	"Jesus said to him, ""The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has nowhere to lay his head."""
Yuu ce nyor koèñ, a yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi koèñ ka'. Yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi koèñ, a yuu ce nyor ce koèñ ka'. Buâu bbaa ca vi yu aè yuu mo'sir ka'. A mbuèu ce aède' aè gee yuu ce wáâ koèñ aè rgeèe ka'.	For the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary to one another, that you may not do the things that you desire.
Bjep ca vi ka' mïì, Pol aè ká' ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a laa buu neè woweèe, a fa woweèe ñger, a daasi woweèe, a nati a ce duè aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè.	After the uproar had ceased, Paul sent for the disciples, took leave of them, and departed to go into Macedonia.
Jisoès aè ká' ku' beèe ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ aè rvúè fa máâ mbuèu, baná ñgaèñ kani yïì nyor, byá' yi kïìntaa, ce vú fa máâ mbuèu.	"He called the multitude to himself with his disciples, and said to them, ""Whoever wants to come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me."
Yuu ce m ce laèa yi yu ba ená ká? Waè' nyúè moè' enjep ñgoèñ na, káè byee ce a ke tañshi tañshïì aègho neè njáèá nyúè ca áè, e ke ba yuu goèr a?	What am I saying then? That a thing sacrificed to idols is anything, or that an idol is anything?
Jisoès aè ka' ce jáèr aèwaâa túè ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a yá beèe mo' a baa, Saimúèn ce li rlii mo' li m ba ená Pitaè, ba Andruè ce e m ba nfúr yïì. Woweèe a m ba ñgaâa ñkoo nca, a ce maè' rraa njep roè, tá a bo koo nca njo.	Walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers: Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew, his brother, casting a net into the sea; for they were fishermen.
Be ba nyúè ce tu ñgaâa ncïìñ njeèe aè vúè tá weèe koni rtaa foèo ce aède' li ke kwe ncoèo ka'.	When the chief Shepherd is revealed, you will receive the crown of glory that doesn't fade away.
Beèe Farïìsi mo' ce a m ba aè múè ku' beèe ca, a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, lapni ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu ca.”	"Some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him, ""Teacher, rebuke your disciples!"""
Ntee yi yañ yïì masaè, e fa ye mbe mmbo ñgaâa ñkeè'ni ñgaâa shañ ená a fa ye ñgá' caar tá e la' yi mbaèa wááwá.	His lord was angry, and delivered him to the tormentors, until he should pay all that was due to him.
Buu ca a buu ce vi ke geèe ñwáè, e ba jaèpri. AÈ rye yuu ke' su'si mmbo ka', a yuu ce aède' yi gee ñwáè e ba jaèpri ka'.”	"These are the things which defile the man; but to eat with unwashed hands doesn't defile the man."""
Fa mɛ̀ àmbò wɛ̀ gwɛɛ.	Give me as you please.
Beèe mo' a byá' ñwáè moè' mbe keèñ ce yïì ñgúè' nyor moè' aè m kwe, a gheter aè rniñ neè ye mbe ndaèp, láè njeptii Jisoès.	Behold, men brought a paralyzed man on a cot, and they sought to bring him in to lay before Jesus.
Beèe a suñ woweèe ená a ce yá'ni Jus ce a ce cu aè bto' beèe enje jáá ená woweèe a fa láè mncir Musïìs ka', a ce laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fa geèe búè ese boo ka', ma' lá ndeèe to' foñ.	They have been informed about you, that you teach all the Jews who are among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, telling them not to circumcise their children neither to walk after the customs.
Yi yu boèñboñ ená aè borni efa rye nyaèa, ker borni efa rno mruè', borni efa geèe njáèá yuu ce aède' yi gee nfúroè koteè.	It is good to not eat meat, drink wine, nor do anything by which your brother stumbles, is offended, or is made weak.
A mbuèu ce m ce gheèter, a ce faè' neè ñger wááwá ce Jisos Kraâis aè fa máè tá m bo mïìsi li rfaè' aègho.	for which I also labor, striving according to his working, which works in me mightily.
Woweèe a ce ye neè mce, a koo mbaèñ caè ese ye, a lip ye aègho mbe tuè.	They spat on him, and took the reed and struck him on the head.
aè vú a yá Pitaè aèmboè e ce yár mor. A fyá' ye ená ntuñ, a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè m ba weèe Jisoès aè rla' Nasaráèt foñ.”	"and seeing Peter warming himself, she looked at him, and said, ""You were also with the Nazarene, Jesus!"""
Felep aè du a suñ Andruè, a ye a du a suñ Jisoès.	Philip came and told Andrew, and in turn, Andrew came with Philip, and they told Jesus.
Kwâa à fʉ yɛɛnì sê.	The corn has germinated very well.
Taèr, máè koèñ máná beèe ce wáè fa máè na, a ba weèr woweèe faèdïì' ce m be ba foñ, tá a bo yá wa bkuè' ce wáè m fa neè máè njobeè' wáè m koèñ máè tá a ka' keè geèe ñgoèñ, a ka' fa máè bkuè' anaè.	Father, I desire that they also whom you have given me be with me where I am, that they may see my glory, which you have given me, for you loved me before the foundation of the world.
Yi yu yáánïì ená soè yá ñgá'. Soè ce yá ñgá' njo' buu bbebep ce soè aè geèe, ñwáè ca aè geèe yi yu yuu mo' ka'.”	"And we indeed justly, for we receive the due reward for our deeds, but this man has done nothing wrong."""
E ka' yu' njeèndoñ Pitaè, rïìñ, a lu'shi seê, a mú' keèñ ka', a cañ a kúti ba mbe ndaèp, a laa enáê, “Pitaè táá njep ncuâu ñka'.”	When she recognized Peter's voice, she didn't open the gate for joy, but ran in, and reported that Peter was standing in front of the gate.
E ka' vúè, bár ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a suñ ye enáê, “Weèr aè yá Tataê.” Tomas aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ka' tá yá bdïì' efa mi mmbo ce a mú ta neè mmbaa naè, joèo neè ntubo, keèr joèo yïì mbeèp nyor neè bo ka', aède' m byemïì ka'.”	"The other disciples therefore said to him, ""We have seen the Lord!"" But he said to them, ""Unless I see in his hands the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe."""
Yi loè efa ká, ma yïì Tata yaè aè ka' vú aè rcaè'ni máè?	Why am I so favored, that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr mbe nshe mboèñmboñ, a fúú, a gee mbúè, moè' aè gee mbúè rjeèe, moè' mntuunfu, moè' mntaar.	Others fell on good soil, and yielded fruit: some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty.
Njeèndoñ aè laa neè ye enáê, “Pitaè, naèti mbekïì, sháshi, ye.”	"A voice came to him, ""Rise, Peter, kill and eat!"""
Byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m fúse enjep beèe magoèr, a ce waani seê, a ce laèa enáê, “A wáè Muu Nyúè.” Jisoès aè waa byú' ca, a ke' fa vi njïì ená vi laa yuu ka' njobeè' vi m rïìñ ená e yu Kraâis anaè.	"Demons also came out from many, crying out, and saying, ""You are the Christ, the Son of God!"" Rebuking them, he didn't allow them to speak, because they knew that he was the Christ."
A woweèe a du neè Jisoès faèdïì' ce a m ce too ená Golgotaè. Mbuèu efa rlii ca yu enáê, “Dïû' keèkeèp tu.”	"They brought him to the place called Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, ""The place of a skull."""
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèr ce koèñ aè rrïìñ yuu ce aè ce kwaè'shi njobeè' weèr rïìñ werná beèe wááwá a ce laèa bebep kuu njáèá nduunjïì ce aè yu njo na.”	"But we desire to hear from you what you think. For, as concerning this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against."""
Ñwáè be keèr yu' aèmboè beèe a ce bu' mluñ, ce fyáp mdoñ ba msoèñ, káè ce yoèp byáá aèfo ka'. Beèe ce a ke fáèr buu enje mmboè a be keèr ba aèfo ka'. Ñwáè be keèr yu' aèmboè a ce goè' baa aèfo ka'.	The voice of harpists, minstrels, flute players, and trumpeters will be heard no more at all in you. No craftsman, of whatever craft, will be found any more at all in you. The sound of a mill will be heard no more at all in you.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Máè laèa buu aèwañ neè beèe wááwá. Máè m ce yá'ni beèe aè nfeè' wááwá aè mndap mloo, ba mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, ce yu bdïì' ce Jus a ke vúè ce tarte. Máè laèa yuu mo' aè bsúèti ka'.	"Jesus answered him, ""I spoke openly to the world. I always taught in synagogues, and in the temple, where the Jews always meet. I said nothing in secret."
“Yi yu ená aède' mbaèñ ce bebep yi yú mbe ce ce boèñboñ ka', a ker ba foñ ená aède' mbaèñ ce boèñboñ yi yú mbe ce ce bebep ka'.	For there is no good tree that brings forth rotten fruit; nor again a rotten tree that brings forth good fruit.
yïì masaè be vúè aè noâñ mo' ce e ce keè' ka', ker ba aè njáèá nfeè' ce e ba riñ ka', gwaète ye aè btete aè btete, fa ye dïì' ba aè múè beèe ce a byemi ka'.	then the lord of that servant will come in a day when he isn't expecting him, and in an hour that he doesn't know, and will cut him in two, and place his portion with the unfaithful.
Máè suñ weèe nfeè' aèñgoo, a ker ce suñ weèe seè'ni neè mñgoommir-ñwáè máná beèe magoèr a yu a weâe mú ce yaèp ndeèe ce duèñshi ená woweèe a baèa rkwe ce Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa naè.	For many walk, of whom I told you often, and now tell you even weeping, as the enemies of the cross of Christ,
Rbuu li karñgeèr aèmboè ñwáè ce kar lá rwaèa wa'a, a bú, mtuèu wááwá ba njáèá ñgoèñ ce rdip li ke sïìr kaari tarte naè, yi ci'tïì a nati embe dïì' yi m ba.	The sky was removed like a scroll when it is rolled up. Every mountain and island were moved out of their places.
Bfee Yú' Nyúè yi ke yááti njep beèe aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá tá ñwáè bo loèr bfee anaè jaè' beèe Nyúè aègho.	But to each one is given the manifestation of the Spirit for the profit of all.
Woweèe a be kwe, bú njobeè' woweèe a koèñ buu ce aè nyoèr a caa Nyúè. A loèr yuu ce rïìtu yi ba koo woweèe aètu mo a beesi aè yuu naèatu, a lá yap ntee wááwá ba njep buu embe tunshe.	whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who think about earthly things.
Taitoès ce kuushi aèmboè weèe wááwá aè m tami nyor aè ryu'nïì, ker ba njáèá njïì ce weèe aè m koni ye neè rwáp-ñwáè, cena yi gee e ker koñ weèe a caa aèmboè e m koèñ.	His affection is more abundantly toward you, while he remembers all of your obedience, how with fear and trembling you received him.
AÈ m ba ñwáè ce a yïì ndap aè m fa yaèp nyor neè Nyúè, a ker ce wáp ye foñ. E m ba mmbo mtoo neè beèe wááwá, a ce loo neè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá.	a devout man, and one who feared God with all his house, who gave gifts for the needy generously to the people, and always prayed to God.
A láè njaèa njep mbuèu ce wáá. Ce ce yi ka' tá yú boèñboñ ka', baná a be gwaèr, maè' njep mor.	"Even now the axe lies at the root of the trees. Therefore, every tree that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	3	11	M ce baèptir ya weèe neè mdip aè rduèñshi ená weèe aè kupse, a ma' yeè buu bbebep. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e ce vúè embe máâ njïì naè yu ñwáè ce e túr ñger a caa máè. Máè ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' m byá' vi blaba' ka'. E be baèptir weèe neè Yú' Rara, ba neè mor.	I indeed baptize you in water for repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to carry. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	3	12	Yïì gúè yu mba yeâ boè tá e bo fyápshi mi msañ aègho, baashi láè njep koo, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè bbúèshïì efa gho, e be ghuèp toèo njep mor ce aède' yi liitïì ka'.”	His winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. He will gather his wheat into the barn, but the chaff he will burn up with unquenchable fire."
Nyúè aè m geèe wa'a tá seèe ce seèe ce geèe ñgeèe ba aèmboè ñwáè koèñ ka', a ce geèe ba aèmboè Yú' Nyúè yi ce koèñ, bo geèe ba buu byáánïì ce vi ghááte aèmboè mncir vi ce laèa.	that the ordinance of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
Yaa mbàa zhi mì dʉ̀dʉ̀.	My money is completely finished.
Jisoès aè táá, a ká' woweèe, a laa enáê, “Weèe ce koèñ weená m gee má ká neè weèe?”	"Jesus stood still, and called them, and asked, ""What do you want me to do for you?"""
Jisoès aè ka' ce ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a duñshi mncoèo, vi gee beèe magoèr a byemïì neè ye seê.	Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover, during the feast, many believed in his name, observing his signs which he did.
Yú' bebep ca yi m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè rïìñ Jisoès, a riñ aèmboè Pol foñ, a weèe ye weèká?”	"The evil spirit answered, ""Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are you?"""
AÈláèksandaè ñwáè ntoèo nlaèa aè m geèe buu bbebep neè máè seê. Tata Nyúè be laè' ye aè buu ce e geèe neè máè anaè.	Alexander, the coppersmith, did much evil to me. The Lord will repay him according to his works,
Seèe yá ka aèmboè Kraêis, ñkúú aè to' Isráèl be suèu embe kïìntaa seè'ni na tá seèe bo byemi neè ye.” Beèe a mmbaa ce a m taa a Jisoès weèe mbe bkïìntaa naè, a cáp ye foñ.	"Let the Christ, the King of Israel, now come down from the cross, that we may see and believe him."" Those who were crucified with him insulted him."
Bfúr waê, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe aè rlii Tata Jisos Kraêis, a ce bu' mmbo neè weèe njobeè' rkoèñnïì ce seèe aè koni ese yi yú', ená weèe koni máè aè rloo ce m ce loo neè yaè nyor, tá seèe loo aèbee.	Now I beg you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the love of the Spirit, that you strive together with me in your prayers to God for me,
A ba fyeèni aè mbaèa goèr seê, loèr mbaèa efa gho fa neè ñgaâa fuèp.”	"For this ointment might have been sold for much, and given to the poor."""
Ndì à barni nyàa banɛ e be koo ŋkùŋ.	Ndi has seconded the animal, therefore he will take the tail.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná weèe fa buu ñkúú neè ñkúú, fa vi Nyúè neè Nyúè.”	"He said to them, ""Then give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."""
seèe aè rïìñ yiseèe ená Nyúè ku ba moè'sir caè'caè', E yu Taèr neè seèe. Yu ye ce e m geèe buu wááwá, a ker gee seèe foñ ená seèe bo ba yïì beèe. Seèe ku túr Tata moè'sir ce yu Jisos Kraêis. Nyúè aè m geèe buu wááwá ba njïì enjep ye. Yu ye ce e fa seèe ryoèñ.	yet to us there is one God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we live through him.
Mbipshǐ mbòŋboŋ mi ke jàʼ bèe sê?	Good questions usually help a lot of people?
Yi ka' koni wa'a, moè' efa beèe ce a m ba a Jisoès weèe, aè co' yïì saè' a tee tuè' ese ñkwaèa ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.	Behold, one of those who were with Jesus stretched out his hand, and drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and struck off his ear.
Shálaè aè ba muu Kaèyinaèn, Kaèyinaèn aè ba muu AÈfasaèr, AÈfasaèr aè ba muu Sháêm, Shám aè ba muu Nowaè, Nowaè aè ba muu Lamáèk,	the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
Ñwáè ka' tá byemi ka', aède' Nyúè yu' rboèñ neè ye ka', njobeè' ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ aè rvúè aètútú neè Nyúè baná ñgaèñ be byemi ená Nyúè yu aègho a ce laè' beèe ce a ce roèo ye neè ntee-ñwáè.	Without faith it is impossible to be well pleasing to him, for he who comes to God must believe that he exists, and that he is a rewarder of those who seek him.
Wáè ce aè ku ba ba ñwáè, aè yu nda ka' beèesi cuèu weèe Nyúè? AÈde' rkïìñ li laa neè ñwáè ce e boo li enáê, “Wáè boo máè wa'a njoká” a?	"But indeed, O man, who are you to reply against God? Will the thing formed ask him who formed it, ""Why did you make me like this?"""
Yú' Rara ca yi yu aèmboè yuu ce Nyúè aè tár lá neè seèe wa'a, caar tá Nyúè tee seèe efa ñgá', tá seèe koni buu wááwá ce e be fa neè yïì beèe, tá beèe wááwá a yá yi foèo, kuè'si ye.	who is a pledge of our inheritance, to the redemption of God's own possession, to the praise of his glory.
Wèr à ba du ser làʼ ser Nfò.	We went across at Nforʼs house.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaèa tañshi tañshïì efa múè Jus a ka' beè', a du a yá Pailáèt a laa neè ye enáê, “Fa sañ ba ená ‘ñkúú Jus’ ka', sañ ba ená ‘ñwáè ca aè m laèa ená a ye ñkúú Juês.’ ”	"The chief priests of the Jews therefore said to Pilate, ""Don't write, 'The King of the Jews,' but, 'he said, I am King of the Jews.'"""
Yàa nyor ce yùr e.	My body is itching.
Yuu mo'sir ce m ce roèo yi yu ená m riñ Kraêis, ker yá yi ñger ce e m túr aè nfeè' ce e m fúú efa rkwe. M ce roèo foñ máná m yá ñgá' aèmboè e m yá, byemi rkwe aèmboè e m byemi,	that I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, becoming conformed to his death;
Nduu fa sheè ñgwa embe bkuu ka'. Ñgwa ye ye fa sheè nduu yïì ka'.	Let the husband render to his wife the affection owed her, and likewise also the wife to her husband.
M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè Timotïì ce e yu muu waè ce mini njobeè' e byemi neè Jisos Kraêis. M ce loo máná Taèr ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tata túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, koosimnse neè weèe, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	to Timothy, my true child in faith: Grace, mercy, and peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Jisoès aè m fa vi bláá aè rtee seèe efa ñgá', Nyúè aè foosïì seèe efa yïìseèe buu bbebep. E m túr ntee boèñboñ neè seèe neè mini-ñwáè,	in whom we have our redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of our trespasses, according to the riches of his grace,
Njáèá njïì ce Nyúè ce geèe beèe a ba byáánïì yu ba aè rbyemi neè Jisos Kraêis. Njáèá njïì ca yu neè beèe wááwá ce a ka' byemi, ñwáè moè' ker ba jáá ka',	even the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ to all and on all those who believe. For there is no distinction,
Jisoès aè du a lor bráâd a vú a gapshi neè woweèe, a ker lor nca a gapshi neè woweèe foñ.	Then Jesus came and took the bread, gave it to them, and the fish likewise.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè beèe ce a be du bguèu káè beèe ce a be lor bbyeèñge ka', ka' Nyúè aè fa máè blaèa mo' ená m laa neè woweèe ka' wa'a, m be suñ woweèe yuu ya ce máâ kwaè'shi. M ce laèa wa'a aèmboè ñwáè ce aètaè weèe yu' yuu ce m ce laèa, njobeè' Tata Jisos Kraâis ce e m koosimnse neè máè.	Now concerning virgins, I have no commandment from the Lord, but I give my judgment as one who has obtained mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy.
Seèe aè ka' lá mmir mbenduè Nyúè wa'a, seèe lá aè cicïì ka' njobeè' seèe rïìñ seená Nyúè aè koèñ seèe magoèr seê. Seèe rïìñ wa'a, ba aè ñger Yú' Rara ce e fa neè seèe naè.	and hope doesn't disappoint us, because God's love has been poured out into our hearts through the Holy Spirit who was given to us.
“Máè m vúè aè rmaè' mor njep ñgoèñ, a ce koèñ máná yi ba káè' war ce she.	"I came to throw fire on the earth. I wish it were already kindled.
Luke	Luêk	12	50	Njáèá baèptir moè' yu ce m be baèptir. Tá m ka' baèptir njáèá baèptir anaè, m be yá mluè.	But I have a baptism to be baptized with, and how distressed I am until it is accomplished!
Luke	Luêk	12	51	Weèe ce kwaè'shi weená máè m vúè ba neè cumúnyañ njep ñgoèñ na a? Yi yu wa' ka'. M ce suñ weèe máná máè m vúè ba neè mñgaèpni.	Do you think that I have come to give peace in the earth? I tell you, no, but rather division.
Luke	Luêk	12	52	Ká' e seè'ni na, beèe a ka' ba mbe ndaèp beèe ntaê, mñgaèpni mi ba fa waâp mú, tá beèe a mntaar a baa beèe a mmbaa, tá beèe a mmbaa a baa beèe a mntaar.	For from now on, there will be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
Luke	Luêk	12	53	Mñgaèpni mi be ba mbetar taèr ba muu mbañruè, tá mñgaèpni mi ba mbetar ma ba muunje. Mñgaèpni mi be ba mbetar maluê, ba ñgwa muu yïì.”	They will be divided, father against son, and son against father; mother against daughter, and daughter against her mother; mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law."
AÈ ka' ba nfeè' ce a ce too nráèá, beèe wááwá a táá njepmbeè a ce geèe rloo.	The whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.
E bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Muu ca aè mú ká' a ce luèñ ba aè nfeè' efá?” Woweèe a beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “E mú luñ neèñkuèr aè nfeè' nyúè aè mú ká' a ce lá'si nyor.”	"So he inquired of them the hour when he began to get better. They said therefore to him, ""Yesterday at the seventh hour, the fever left him."""
Geewa'a, e m fa yïì nyor neè woweèe ka' njobeè' e m rïìñ mntee beèe wááwá.	But Jesus didn't trust himself to them, because he knew everyone,
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Yi yu yi ká aèmboè weèe? Weèe ce laèa ye weená m yu nda?” Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “A wáè Kraâis yïì Nyúè.”	"He said to them, ""But who do you say that I am?"" Peter answered, ""The Christ of God."""
‘Wáè ce Bátáèláèháêm, ce aè yu aè ñgoâñ Judaè, aè yu ñwáâ múcaèr aè múè ñgaâa rsa' aè ñgoèñ Judaè ka' koo-múcaèr, njobeè' ñwáè rsa' be fúú efa múè yoè beèe, cïìñ yaè beèe Isráèl aèmboè ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe.’ ”	"You Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no way least among the princes of Judah: for out of you shall come forth a governor, who shall shepherd my people, Israel.'"""
Baná wáè ba laèa tá a ke'ni rsheè anaè boèñboñ caar tá mnoèñ vi caâa btaar, faè dïì' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a vú yáèá gúâú ñwáè, suñ beèe ená e fúú efa rkwe, tá mnde' ce a nya' elúèsimbuèu na mi caa mïì entoèmbïì ka'.”	"Command therefore that the tomb be made secure until the third day, lest perhaps his disciples come at night and steal him away, and tell the people, 'He is risen from the dead;' and the last deception will be worse than the first."""
Ñgaèñ be borni buu bbebep, geèe ba buu bboèñboñ. E be koèñ cumúnyañ, roèo mnduunjïì aè rkoni cumúnyañ anaè. Ñgaèñ aè ba geèe wa'a,	Let him turn away from evil, and do good. Let him seek peace, and pursue it.
Mɛ̀ yùrsi msur.	I have inhaled air following the effect of pepper.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáâ koèñ ená m gee ba ká neè wáè?” E beesïì enáê, “M ce koèñ máná aè laa tá moè' efa boo wa ke cu aè yo bo maè', tá moè' cu aè yo bo ñkoèp, aè nfeè' ce aè ce sa' yo kúú.”	"He said to her, ""What do you want?"" She said to him, ""Command that these, my two sons, may sit, one on your right hand, and one on your left hand, in your Kingdom."""
Jisoès aè ciisïì neè ye enáê, “Fa suñ ñwáè moè' ka'. Duè duñshi yoè nyor neè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì embe Ndaèp Nyúè tá aè bo geèe tañshïì ce Musïìs aè m laèa ená ñwáè gee tá e bo ba nrara, tá beèe a bo rïìñ ená ñwáè anaè aè keè'se naè.”	"He commanded him to tell no one, ""But go your way, and show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing according to what Moses commanded, for a testimony to them."""
E ka' laèa wa'a, a ker suñ woweèe enáê, “Lasoèroès ce yu ñkar yïìseèe ce buumi buumi. M be duè tá m bo yáèá ye efa mmirloè.”	"He said these things, and after that, he said to them, ""Our friend, Lazarus, has fallen asleep, but I am going so that I may awake him out of sleep."""
Woweèe a ka' loo, mbe dïì' ce woweèe a m ba naè yi ci'tïì, woweèe a ruu neè Yú' Rara, a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè ntee-ñwáè.	When they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were gathered together. They were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.
AÈ ka' ba njo' yuu ce Jisoès Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè' aè m geèe, e fa seèe yi yú' seê,	whom he poured out on us richly, through Jesus Christ our Savior;
Sèe cu mʉnyaŋ yuʼshi yuu ce e ce làa.	Let us be quiet and listen to what he is say.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ce a m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa naè ker ba buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe naè, a gú'shïì neè Nyúè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè', a laa enáê, “Yi yu wa'a! AÈleèluyaè.”	"The twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying, ""Amen! Hallelujah!"""
Awá Jisoès aè ce jáèshi aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a ce feè'shi aè mndap rloo, a ce fúshi byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe.	He went into their synagogues throughout all Galilee, preaching and casting out demons.
Nsuñ aèmboè Jisoès aè m duè aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoèñ anaè.	News about him went out into every place of the surrounding region.
Jisoès aè fyá' woweèe, a laa enáê, “Buu ca vi yu btatap se neè ñwáè, ke' ba neè Nyúè ka', njobeè' buu wááwá vi yu aètáèr neè Nyúè.”	"Jesus, looking at them, said, ""With men it is impossible, but not with God, for all things are possible with God."""
Woweèe a m ku fa weèr ncep ba aè yuu mo'sir caè'caè'. Woweèe a m laèa ená weèr fa leèse efa rjaè' ñgaâa fuèp ka'. Woweèe a m ku laa ba yuu ce máè m ce koèñ aè rgeèe seê.	They only asked us to remember the poor--which very thing I was also zealous to do.
Naègayïì aè ba muu Maêr, Mar aè ba muu Maètaètiyaèr, Maètaètiyaèr aè ba muu Sámáèn, Sámáèn aè ba muu Josáèf, Josáèf aè ba muu Jodaè,	the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Judah,
Máè m ce laèa neè Jus ker ba beèe enje jáá tatap se ená a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep, kúti aè mbeèp yïì Nyúè, byemi neè Tata Jisoès.	testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus.
Loèr Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce e ce suñ aèmboè cumúnyañ ce Nyúè ce fa neè beèe, tá e ba aèmboè blaba' ce ñwáè maè' bïìr aè yar, faè dïì' aè bo gweè ka'.	and having fitted your feet with the preparation of the Good News of peace;
Nfʉr zhìi à jàʼni wèr ye.	His brother has condoled with him.
Woweèe a m ker ce kwaè'shi aèmboè lap rla' ce a m loâ aèfo naè ka'. Woweèe a m ka' ba ce kwaè'shi aèmboè lap rla' anaè, a m ba túr njïì aè rkúti aèfo.	If indeed they had been thinking of that country from which they went out, they would have had enough time to return.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Kúti neè du suñ Joân buu ce weèe aè yu' a ker yá.	"Jesus answered them, ""Go and tell John the things which you hear and see:"
Josáèf aè ba muu Maètaètiyaèr, Maètaètiyaèr aè ba muu Ámoès, Ámoès aè ba muu Nahuèm, Nahuèm aè ba muu Ásileè, Ásileè aè ba muu Naègayïì,	the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
E ka' ce jáèr aè ñgoèñ anaè a ce laèa ku' buu neè beèe, a ce fa woweèe ñger neè blaèa anaè. E ka' mïìsi, a du aè ñgoâñ Greês,	When he had gone through those parts, and had encouraged them with many words, he came into Greece.
Fa kèr lìp ye kaʼ.	Donʼt beat him again.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger aèwaâa nduunjïì naè táá yi ba aètu beèe ce a yu' blaâa Nyúè, Sataèn ku fúr blaèa anaè enjep waâp mntee, faè dïì' woweèe a bo byemi, luèñ ka'.	Those along the road are those who hear, then the devil comes, and takes away the word from their heart, that they may not believe and be saved.
AÈmboè weèe yu boo ce weèe ce yu'ni na, weèe fa keèr raèasi nyor aè buu bbebep ce weèe aè m ce koèñ aè rgeèe aè nfeè' ce weèe aè m máñni buu naè ka'.	as children of obedience, not conforming yourselves according to your former lusts as in your ignorance,
Vi kuèu nduu a nje foñ. Baná mbañruèñwáè koñ ñgwa yïì aèmboè e koèñ yïì nyor, tá njeñwáè yu'ni neè nduu yïì.	Nevertheless each of you must also love his own wife even as himself; and let the wife see that she respects her husband.
E yu ŋwɛ̀ rfǎʼ nyɛɛnì sê.	He is a very good workman.
E ke gèe ŋgèe àmbò ŋkar zhìi.	She behaves like her friend.
tá beèe a ku'si wáè njo' cor ker ba njo' Jisos Kraâis aè nfeè' wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	to him be the glory in the assembly and in Christ Jesus to all generations forever and ever. Amen.
Ñwáè ka' ma'shi yuu ce Kraâis aè m yá'ni, ce geèe jáá, baná ñgaèñ yu aèbee a Nyúè ka'. Ñwáè ka' ku cu ba njep yuu ce Kraâis aè m yá'ni, baná ñgaèñ yu aèbee a Taèr a ker ba aèbee a Muu.	Whoever transgresses and doesn't remain in the teaching of Christ, doesn't have God. He who remains in the teaching, the same has both the Father and the Son.
Noèñ mmbomntaa Nyúè yi ka' caèa, Máèári e aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Máèári ma yïì Jáêms, ba Saèlomeè a yuu njáèá mgúr mo' tá a bo yo' gúâú ñwáè aègho.	When the Sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, that they might come and anoint him.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce Nyúè aè ce máè ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè beèe Nyúè ce a yu aè to' Áfásoès. Beèe Nyúè ca yu beèe ce a duè aèmbuèu Jisos Kraâis neè mini-ñwáè.	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, to the saints who are at Ephesus, and the faithful in Christ Jesus:
Yer zhi bâ?	You have just sent your fowls into the roost.
Joân aè laa neè woweèe wááwá enáê, “M ce baèptir weèe neè mdip, geewa'a, ñwáè moè' ce yi ñger yi caèa ya ce vúè. Máè ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' m ba'shïì vi bkúè laba' ka'. E be baèptir yi weèe neè Yú' Rara ba mor.	"John answered them all, ""I indeed baptize you with water, but he comes who is mightier than I, the latchet of whose sandals I am not worthy to loosen. He will baptize you in the Holy Spirit and fire,"
Koo neè ñwáè rfaè' ce e yu ñwáâ cicïì naè, ma' aè dïì' ce ku ba ba túè'nji ce beèe a be ce warse ce kúr msoèñ aèfo.’	Throw out the unprofitable servant into the outer darkness, where there will be weeping and gnashing of teeth.'
Woweèe a ka' baè' mbe dïì' ce a m ce too ená Keèkeèp-Tu, a taa Jisoès mbe kïìntaa mbo, a taa beèe moè' ce a m bú' ncir naè mbo foñ. Moè' aè m ba mbe kïìntaa a yeâ bo maè', moè' aè ba mbe kïìntaa a yeâ bo ñkoèp.	When they came to the place that is called The Skull, they crucified him there with the criminals, one on the right and the other on the left.
Seŋkɛ yar nfěʼ mbòŋmboŋ.	Singke is wearing a good watch.
Beèe a ka' riñ Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê, a ker ba ñwáè ce e geèe seèe aè luêñ, ma'shi buu bbebep enjep ñgoèñ ce vi ke bepsi ñwáè naè, ker lo kúti aèmbuèu mo, baná woweèe a yu mbe dïû' bebep aè nfeè' anaè a caa aèmboè a m ba entombïì.	For if, after they have escaped the defilement of the world through the knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, they are again entangled in it and overcome, the last state has become worse for them than the first.
Woweèe a kútïì, a suñ buu ca neè beèe ce ncoèp-moè'sir-aè-rrúèú, ker ba bár beèe.	returned from the tomb, and told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.
Woweèe a m yu' aèmboè rsoèñ li laèa, a ker yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ñwáè aè laèa. Buu ce njeèndoñ ñwáè anaè aè m laèa vi m wápsi woweèe, woweèe a bu' mmbo ená njeèndoñ anaè fa keèr laèa ka'.	the sound of a trumpet, and the voice of words; which those who heard it begged that not one more word should be spoken to them,
Pitaè aè m cu njep mambe, muunje moè' ce e m ba ñwáè rfaè' aè vúê, a yá ye, a laa enáê, “Wá wáè aè m ba weèe Jisoès ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.”	"Now Peter was sitting outside in the court, and a maid came to him, saying, ""You were also with Jesus, the Galilean!"""
Beèe mo' efa múè Farïìsi ce a m byemi, a m natïì mbekïì a laa enáê, “Yi yu ená beèe enje jáá a ku túr aè rgeèe búè, tá a ker suñ woweèe ená woweèe a lá mncir Musïìs.”	"But some of the sect of the Pharisees who believed rose up, saying, ""It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses."""
M ku ce fa ca ba aèmboè ntañ, ke' ba ená a ncir ka'.	But this I say by way of concession, not of commandment.
Boo waê, ce cu neè aèbee weèe Kraâis weèe, tá e ba aè nfeè' ce e vúè naè, seèe bo lu'shi aè ryá ye, keè' ce koosi rïìtu ce súèni aè nfeè' ce e vúè ka'.	Now, little children, remain in him, that when he appears, we may have boldness, and not be ashamed before him at his coming.
Mnoèñ saèamba ca vi ka' káè' ce mïì, Jus moâ' aè ñgoâñ Áshaè aè yá Pol mbe Ndaèp Nyúè. Woweèe a ka' yá ye mbo, a barsi beèe fa yeâ mbuèu, a woweèe a koo ye,	When the seven days were almost completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the multitude and laid hands on him,
Ŋkaa à gwè embe ce.	The monkey has fallen from the tree.
Ñwáè moè' ce e m ba mbe kïìntaa foñ naè aè lapnïì ye, a laa enáê, “AÈ ce wáp Nyúè ka' a? To wá wáè ku ba ñwáè rkwe foñ aèmboè ye.	"But the other answered, and rebuking him said, ""Don't you even fear God, seeing you are under the same condemnation?"
Woweèe a niñ njo, a yá gúâú Tata Jisoès ka'.	They entered in, and didn't find the Lord Jesus' body.
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a ce roèo nduunjïì aè rkoo Jisoès aè nfeè' anaè njobeè' woweèe a m rïìñ ená e maè' ñgaèa anaè ba neè woweèe. Geewa'a, woweèe a m wáp beèe.	The chief priests and the scribes sought to lay hands on him that very hour, but they feared the people--for they knew he had spoken this parable against them.
Mboâñtu mi yu neè weèe ce njeè ce yañ weèe seè'ni na, njobeè' weèe be keè ye yu'. Mboâñtu mi yu neè weèe ce weèe ce warse seè'ni na, njobeè' weèe be keè vúèshi.	Blessed are you who hunger now, for you will be filled. Blessed are you who weep now, for you will laugh.
A mbuèu ce máè tuu Timotïì ená e vú yá weèe. Máè tuu ye ená e vú yá ená weèe ku táá tatap njep le rbyemïì lá. Máè geèe wa'a njobeè' máè kwaè'shi aèmboè buu ce vi koni weèe na, vi caa ya ñger, máè riñ aèmboè m ku cu wa' ka'. Máè m ce wáp máná seemoè' Sataèn aè moèoshi weèe goèr seê, tá yi lo ba seè'ni ená rfaè' ce weèr aè m geèe li bú aè cicïì.	For this cause I also, when I couldn't stand it any longer, sent that I might know your faith, for fear that by any means the tempter had tempted you, and our labor would have been in vain.
aè ba byú' ce vi m teèe tu eluâuñgoèñ aè nfeè' ce Nowa aè m ce baè'ri keñ, Nyúè aè kur ntee neè vi naè. Beèe ce a m niñ mbe keñ anaè a m ba múcaèr seê. AÈ m ku ba beèe nwaami caè'caè' ce a m luèñ embenjïì mdip anaè.	who before were disobedient, when God waited patiently in the days of Noah, while the ship was being built. In it, few, that is, eight souls, were saved through water.
Jisoès aè laa yuu ka'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ko'shïì a yeâ geñ, a laa neè ye enáê, “Laèa tá e duê, njobeè' e ce war a seâe mbuèu.”	"But he answered her not a word. His disciples came and begged him, saying, ""Send her away; for she cries after us."""
Jisoès aè m maè' ñgaèa ca neè woweèe, woweèe a ke' riñ ñgaèa anaè ka'.	Jesus spoke this parable to them, but they didn't understand what he was telling them.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ko'shïì a yeâ geñ a bipshi neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce suñ buu neè beèe ba aè mñgaèa njoká?”	"The disciples came, and said to him, ""Why do you speak to them in parables?"""
E m yá bcïìndap Nyúè a baa. Woweèe a m maè' bcáâ' bbúú, a cu mbe dïì' ce a m láè gúâú ñwáè naè. Moè' aè cu mbe dïì' ce yïì tu yi m noèñ, moè' a cu mbe dïì' ce mi m mkuèu mi m noèñ.	and she saw two angels in white sitting, one at the head, and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
Ñgaâa rbyemïì wááwá a m ku ba aèbee, a túr yaèp buu aèbee.	All who believed were together, and had all things in common.
E m ba aèmboè Nyúè yu naè, a ka' ba wa'a, a ke' ce gheèter ená e be kuè cu aèmboè Nyúè yu naè ka'.	who, existing in the form of God, didn't consider equality with God a thing to be grasped,
Jisoès aè m ba aè rla' Bátanïì, mbe ndaèp Saimúèn ñwáè msaèasïì.	Now when Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
Yi yu ená njeñwáè ka' du bguèu baná e be kuè cu a nduu yïì keè caèa kwe. Ka' ba ne ená nduu yïì aè kwe, baná e túr ñger aè ryá nduu moè', ce yu ba ñwáè ce e táá njep múè buu Tataê.	A wife is bound by law for as long as her husband lives; but if the husband is dead, she is free to be married to whoever she desires, only in the Lord.
Nfeè' ñkaè' aè ka' gháá, e tuu yïì ñwáè rfaè' ená e du laa neè beèe ce e m be naè ená woweèe a vúse, njobeè' e fár buu ñkaè' a misïî.	He sent out his servant at supper time to tell those who were invited, 'Come, for everything is ready now.'
Baná m ce suñ weèe ená a be koo kúú Nyúè ese weèe, fa neè to' ce yi be geèe ndeèe kúú anaè.	"Therefore I tell you, the Kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation bringing forth its fruit.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	44	[Ñwáè ce e ka' gwe mbenduè luèr ca, baná ñgaèñ be ceeñger aè btete aè btete. Ñwáè ce luèr ca aè ka' gwe ba mbe yeâ nduè, baná e be bú'shi ye.]”	He who falls on this stone will be broken to pieces, but on whoever it will fall, it will scatter him as dust."
Beèe ce a m kaari anaè a m jep, a ce ghaa a ce laèa buu jáá jáèá jáá njobeè' beèe magoèr a m rïìñ yap yu mbuèu ce woweèe a m vúè mbo ka'.	Some therefore cried one thing, and some another, for the assembly was in confusion. Most of them didn't know why they had come together.
Borni mkwaè'shïì blúr, borni efa rgeèe buu bbebep. Máè yá máná beèe mo' efa weèe a rïìñ Nyúè ka' koo múcaèr. M ce laèa wa' tá rïìtu yi bo koo weèe.	Wake up righteously, and don't sin, for some have no knowledge of God. I say this to your shame.
E ke ba nè mootì, nyʉ saŋ sê.	At noon, the sun shines too much.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÂ too máè ená ñwáâ mboèñmboñ njoká? Ñwáè moè' yu ñwáâ mboèñmboñ ka', ñwáâ mboèñmboñ ku ba Nyúè caè'caè'.	"Jesus asked him, ""Why do you call me good? No one is good, except one--God."
Seèe aè rïìñ seená blaèa ce bcïìndap Nyúè a m suñ neè viseèe bta vi m túr ñger seê. Ñwáè ce e m ka' tee tu, yu'ni neè blaèa anaè ka', e m ku yá ñgá' ce e m ba yá.	For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense;
Beèe magoèr efa múè bfúr viseèe a ka' yá máè mbe shañ wa'a, Tata aè geêe, woweèe a misïì a túr ntee, a ce feè'shi Blaâa Nyúè neè ñger-ñwáè a ke' ce wáp yuu ka'.	and that most of the brothers in the Lord, being confident through my bonds, are more abundantly bold to speak the word of God without fear.
Ñwáè ka' lor yïì buu wááwá gapshi neè beèe, ker ma'shi ená beèe a koo ye too neè mor, e ka' tá koèñ beèe ka', sá' moè' ba njo ka'.	If I dole out all my goods to feed the poor, and if I give my body to be burned, but don't have love, it profits me nothing.
Woweèe a yu beèe enjep ñgoèñ, baná a ce laèa yap ba buu enjep ñgoèñ, ñgoèñ yi ce yu' buu ce woweèe a ce laèa.	They are of the world. Therefore they speak of the world, and the world hears them.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a lor ndoñ, a yoñshi Nyúè, a laa enáê, “Koè neè no.	"He received a cup, and when he had given thanks, he said, ""Take this, and share it among yourselves,"
M ce loo neè ÁÈvodïìyaè ba Sïìntikáè máná woweèe a ba tarte, ba cuâu mo'sir njobeè' woweèe a tarshi a Tata weèe.	I exhort Euodia, and I exhort Syntyche, to think the same way in the Lord.
M ce loo máná Nyúè ghoni weèe wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	Grace be with you all. Amen.
Máè ce m yu ñwáè shañ njo' Tata Jisoès, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe gee ñgeèe ce yi ghááte aè ñgeèe beèe ce Nyúè aè ká' ená a ba yïì beèe.	I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, beg you to walk worthily of the calling with which you were called,
Ka' nyúè'tu ce yi yu mbe weâe tuè, a beè' wááwá.	but the very hairs of your head are all numbered.
E ce gèe ba kɛ seesê.	What is she particularly doing.
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, ñwáè mbaèa moè' ce aè rla' AÈrimaètiyaè aè vúê. A m too ye ená Josáèf, ye ye aè ba moè' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès.	When evening had come, a rich man from Arimathaea, named Joseph, who himself was also Jesus' disciple came.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, muu ce a m ku bi aèmboè beèe wááwá a ke bi boo naè, aè lo a ce fa ñgá' neè muu ce a m bi ba aè ñger Yú' Nyúè naè. Yi ku ba seè'ni wa' foñ.	But as then, he who was born according to the flesh persecuted him who was born according to the Spirit, so also it is now.
ba aènjïìsaèp efa buu bbebep wááwá.	Abstain from every form of evil.
E m duè aèmbuèu weèr Pol weèe, a ce fuñ enáê, “Beèe ca yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Nyúâ ñgoèr. A ce suñ weèe njáèá njïì ce aède' weèe gee ka' luêñ.”	"Following Paul and us, she cried out, ""These men are servants of the Most High God, who proclaim to us a way of salvation!"""
Beèe Farïìsi a m bipshi neè Jisoès ená kúú Nyúè yi be keè vúè ba aè se'ká lá. Jisoès aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Kúú Nyúè yi be vúè aè njáèá njïì ce beèe a ce yá neè mmir ka'.	"Being asked by the Pharisees when the Kingdom of God would come, he answered them, ""The Kingdom of God doesn't come with observation;"
Geèe neè yuu wááwá ce aède' weèe geêe, tá weèe bo cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè weèe beèe wááwá.	If it is possible, as much as it is up to you, be at peace with all men.
Beèe mo' a m vúèshi woweèe, a laa enáê, “Beèe ca a no mruè' mi koo woweèe.”	"Others, mocking, said, ""They are filled with new wine."""
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' ñgá' ce e yu seè'ni na, m ce kwaè'shi máná yi yu boèñboñ ená ñwáè ku cu aèmboè e yu.	I think that it is good therefore, because of the distress that is on us, that it is good for a man to be as he is.
A mbuèu ce máè byemi buu ca. Káè bgoè'sïì áè, káè mcáp áè, káè bjep ce vi vúè neè máè áè, káè yu buu ce vi tap neè máè áè, káè yu ñgá' áè, máè byemi buu ca wááwá njo' Jisos Kraêis, a ce bu' ka'. Máè byemi wa'a njobeè' e ke ba aè nfeè' ce m goè'si, m ka' túr ñger.	Therefore I take pleasure in weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, for Christ's sake. For when I am weak, then am I strong.
Máè ka' ce geèe buu ca, woweèe a vú a yá máè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè. Woweèe a m ce yá máè wa'a, máè geèe neè yuu ce ncir yi laèa ená ñwáè gee tá e bo ba rara aè bsii Nyúè naè wáá, a ba weèr kúr beèe ka', ñgá' moè' aè ba ka'.	amid which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a mob, nor with turmoil.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Vúè neè fa máâ mbuèu tá m gee tá weèe ba ñgaâa ñkoo nca ce be ba beèe.”	"He said to them, ""Come after me, and I will make you fishers for men."""
Nyúè aè ka' sañ, a too ñgúè buu anaè, e yoprïì njobeè' mñgaèñ vi m niñ njep nshe boèñboñ ka'.	When the sun had risen, they were scorched. Because they had no root, they withered away.
[Silaès aè kwa'shïì aè rcu aèfo.]	nan
Weèe aè yá seè'ni ená ñwáè yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' yïì ndeâe mboèñmboñ, ke' ku ba njo' li rbyemïì caè' ka'.	You see then that by works, a man is justified, and not only by faith.
Beèe mo' a m suñ Sol ená beèe a ce roèo mi mkuèu. Woweèe a m ce keè'ni bcuâu ñka' neèmootïì ba neètú', tá a bo koo Sol yú.	but their plot became known to Saul. They watched the gates both day and night that they might kill him,
Woowèe a màʼ kwaa njep mor.	They have thrown corn inside the fire.
Woweèe a waa, enáê, “Wáâ Tata Nyúè ce aè túr ñger, a ba ñwáâ mini, a ba nrara, weèr be cu mbena duè baè' aè nfeè' efá tá aè ka' sa' beèe enjep ñgoèñ, fa woweèe ñgá' njobeè' woweèe a m yúshi weèr?”	"They cried with a loud voice, saying, ""How long, Master, the holy and true, until you judge and avenge our blood on those who dwell on the earth?"""
M ka' bipshi yuu neè weèe, weèe beesïì ka'.	and if I ask, you will in no way answer me or let me go.
Woweèe a m moèoshi máè aè rïìñ anaè wa'a, a yá buu ce máè m geèe neè woweèe aè bfeè' mñkyeèe.	where your fathers tested me by proving me, and saw my works for forty years.
AÈ ka' ba aèlúèsimbuèu e duñshïì yïì nyor neè máè aè njáèá njïì ce aède' ñwáè aè m ba kwa'shi ka'.	and last of all, as to the child born at the wrong time, he appeared to me also.
Suñ ka weèr yuu ce aè ce kwaè'shi. Ncir yi byemi ená seèe ma' mbaâa baèraè' neè ñkwe Rum káè seèe ma' ka'?”	"Tell us therefore, what do you think? Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"""
Woweèe a ku lá map mraa, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	They immediately left their nets and followed him.
[Pol aè ka' laèa wa'a, Jus a natïì a duê, a ce sár mnsár a waâp mú tatap seê.]	When he had said these words, the Jews departed, having a great dispute among themselves.
Beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú a ká' ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yi yu yáánïì ená weèr borni efa rfeè'shi blaâa Nyúè ce gaèpshi ba buu neè beèe ka'.	"The twelve summoned the multitude of the disciples and said, ""It is not appropriate for us to forsake the word of God and serve tables."
‘A be kuè fa Muu Ñwáè neè ñgaâa geèe buu bbebep, tá woweèe a taa ye mbe kïìntaa, mnoèñ vi ba btaar tá e fúú efa rkwe’ naè.”	"saying that the Son of Man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again?"""
Yuu entombïì ce máè yu' yi yu ená e ke ba aè nfeè' ce weèe aè vúè aèbee aè rgeèe rloo neè Nyúè, ñgaèpni yi ba a weâe mú. Máè yá máná seemoè' yi yu mini wa'a.	For first of all, when you come together in the assembly, I hear that divisions exist among you, and I partly believe it.
AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Ñwáè wááwá aè ka' ba ñwáè mnde', Nyúè ku ba yi yu ñwáâ mini. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Tá beèe a yá ená wáâ ke laèa, ku gee aèmboè wáè laèa. Wáâ ke sa' wo mnsa', ku so.”	"May it never be! Yes, let God be found true, but every man a liar. As it is written, ""That you might be justified in your words, and might prevail when you come into judgment."""
Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú lo geèe bsaèrbuu káè loèr buu Nyúè aètáèr loè ba aèmbo Ásoè ce e m fyeèni blee aètu baa naè ka'.	lest there be any sexually immoral person, or profane person, like Esau, who sold his birthright for one meal.
Rler rli yû?	You ate a kola nut.
Woweèe a ka' baè' aè nduunjïì a yá Saimúèn ce aè rla' Saèireên, aèmboè e ce kúti efa mñkúè. AÈ m ba taèr yïì AÈláèksandaè ba Rufoès. Woweèe a koo ye aè ñger ená e koo kïìntaa ese Jisoès byá'.	They compelled one passing by, coming from the country, Simon of Cyrene, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to go with them, that he might bear his cross.
Muu jeèe ca aè ka' keèr naèa nlaèadoñ yïì embenjïì, máè yu' aèmboè yuu teèe mo' yi laèa enáê, “Vúè!”	"When he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, ""Come!"""
Yïì beèe ce a woweèe a m ba a m yá yuu ce yi be koni, a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, weèr gwate woweèe neè saè' a?”	"When those who were around him saw what was about to happen, they said to him, ""Lord, shall we strike with the sword?"""
Woweèe a ka' yu' ca, a ker túr yuu laèa ka', a ku'si Nyúè, a ce laèa enáê, “Baná Nyúè aè maè'shi foñ ená beèe enje jáá a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep tá a bo koni ryoèñ.”	"When they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, ""Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life!"""
Cáè' ce a m teni dïû' mo' embe Ndaèp Nyúè aègho yi ku sati aè nfeè' anaè tïìtïìyáá, ká' embe tuè, ba' njep mbuèu, ñgoèñ yi ci'tïì, myáá mi wañgeèr,	Behold, the veil of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom. The earth quaked and the rocks were split.
Dáèmitroès ba yi ñgaâa mfaè' a ka' túr yuu mo' kuu ñwáè moè', baná woweèe a riñ ená bkor vi ku táá btoo, ñgaâa rsa' a ba aègho, baná woweèe a du mbo sa' waêp mnsa'.	If therefore Demetrius and the craftsmen who are with him have a matter against anyone, the courts are open, and there are proconsuls. Let them press charges against one another.
Sàʼ Nfòmi cɛp sê.	Nformiʼs cutlass is very sharp.
Jisoès aè fúú njepmbeè neè rtaa bsoèpsïì ca mbe tuè ba cáâ' beer caè aè nyoèr. Pailáèt aè laa enáê, “Yá laè neè ñwáè anaè.”	"Jesus therefore came out, wearing the crown of thorns and the purple garment. Pilate said to them, ""Behold, the man!"""
Sataèn aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ka' ba muu Nyúè, aè laa ka tá bluèr ca vi beeñger aè bráêd.”	"The devil said to him, ""If you are the Son of God, command this stone to become bread."""
Leè' entoèmbïì anaè yi m ba ghááte aè rgeèe tá beèe a ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, Nyúè aè m ba keèr ye leè' mo' ka'.	For if that first covenant had been faultless, then no place would have been sought for a second.
Ncïìndap Nyúè yïì entoèmbïì aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi naè njep ñgoèñ. E ka' cuè', bkoètá ce vi ke yañ se naè vi koo beèe ce a m fa woweèe ncoèo nyaèa caè, woweèe a ker ce gú'shi neè blañ nyaèa anaè naè.	The first went, and poured out his bowl into the earth, and it became a harmful and evil sore on the people who had the mark of the beast, and who worshiped his image.
Weèr aè loâ aè rla' Tayaè a du a ba' aè rla' Toèlemáès, a ca'ni bfúr vïû aèfo, a cu weèr woweèe aè noâñ mo'sir.	When we had finished the voyage from Tyre, we arrived at Ptolemais. We greeted the brothers, and stayed with them one day.
A ka' ku'si Nyúè njïì enjep ye, baná Nyúè be kuè'si Muu njïì enjep yeâ nyoèr. E be geèe wa'a cárcár seê.	If God has been glorified in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him immediately.
E m gheèter foñ ená e gee tá Ndap Nyúè ba jaèpri, weèr aè koo ye. [Weèr aè m ce kwaè'shi werná weèr be loèr yer ncir sa' vi mnsa' aègho.	He even tried to profane the temple, and we arrested him.
Ma ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè lor luèr ce e m kuè' aèmboè ñgoè' baa wa'a, a ma' njep roè a laa enáê, “A be koo ma rla' ce a too ená Babiloèn na aè ñger, geèe tá li gwe wa'a, tá ñwáè ker yá rli ka'.	"A mighty angel took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, ""Thus with violence will Babylon, the great city, be thrown down, and will be found no more at all."
Weèe ce laèa weená ñwáè aè ka' lor yuu ce e ba jaè' yïì ma ba yïì ta aègho, laa ená, ‘Yuu ce máè túr ce máè ba jaè' wáè aègho naè, yu Kobaèn’, ce yi yu enáê, ‘Máè fa neè Nyúè,’	"But you say, 'If a man tells his father or his mother, ""Whatever profit you might have received from me is Corban, that is to say, given to God;""'"
Weèe aè ka' ce geèe rloo, túr ñwáè moè' aè ntee bebep, weèe foosïì ye tá yeè Ta embe buèu bo foèosi weèe yeè buu bbebep foñ.	Whenever you stand praying, forgive, if you have anything against anyone; so that your Father, who is in heaven, may also forgive you your transgressions.
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ cwaʼ bkòʼ e ku zhe à nyaʼ.	If one pounds coco yams, he can eat it with garden eggs.
Cena a yuu ce Jowál ce ñwáè ntuu Nyúè aè m suñ beèe. E m suñ enáê,	But this is what has been spoken through the prophet Joel:
Geewa'a, ñwáè rfaè' anaè aè ka' laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘Yi be loèr nfeè' seê, tá yaè masaè ka' vúè,’ ká' seè'ni ce lïìp mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge ce a yu ñgaâa mfaè', ce ye yïì buu, ce no buu, vi ce koo ye,	But if that servant says in his heart, 'My lord delays his coming,' and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken,
Sol aè m byemi ená a yú Stáfaèn. AÈ m ba aè noèñ anaè a ká' a ce fa ñgá' neè cor ce aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm seê. Yi ka' ba wa'a, ñgaâa rbyemïì a da'seè aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ba aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè. Beèe mo' efa waâp mú ce a m ku cu aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè m ku ba ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès.	Saul was consenting to his death. A great persecution arose against the assembly which was in Jerusalem in that day. They were all scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except for the apostles.
Jisoès aè m laèa buu ca aè nfeè' ce e m ce yá'ni beèe mbe ndaèp rloo aè rla' Kaèpanuèm.	He said these things in the synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba mbe tu ndap, e fa suèu embo aè rloèr yuu ka' cañ ka'.	and let him who is on the housetop not go down, nor enter in, to take anything out of his house.
Zhi bòŋ à rsaŋ ŋwàʼ anà nè yoo bo.	It is good to write that letter yourself.
E be tuu bcïìndap aè bdïì' wááwá aè mmbuu ñgoèñ kyeèe tá a baashi yïì beèe ce e m ce naè ñgúè' moè'sir.	Then he will send out his angels, and will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from the ends of the earth to the ends of the sky.
AÈ ka' ba njo' bfee ce Nyúè aè fa máè, máè boo kuèundap aèmboè ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè rboo yuu seê. Beèe mo' a ce boo ndap mbe kuèundap anaè. Ñwáè wááwá ce e ce boo, lor nfeè'.	According to the grace of God which was given to me, as a wise master builder I laid a foundation, and another builds on it. But let each man be careful how he builds on it.
Mɛ̌ kòŋ à rno mdip fʉte-fʉtè.	I like to drink cold water.
baná ñgaèñ be keèr jaè' yïì ta ba yïì ma aègho ka'. Baná weèe aè loèr ndeèe weêe bta a siñsi mncir Nyúè aègho.	he shall not honor his father or mother.' You have made the commandment of God void because of your tradition.
Ku ba máè ce m be duèñshi ye ku' ñgá' ce e be yá njo' la rlii.”	"For I will show him how many things he must suffer for my name's sake."""
Beèe ce a m ce caèa yap caèa a m ce koèr btu, a ce suè' ye neè mcáp, a ce laèa enáê, “AÈhaê! Wáè ce aède' aè sa'sïì Ndap Nyúè baè'ri aè mnoâñ btaar,	"Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads, and saying, ""Ha! You who destroy the temple, and build it in three days,"
Jisos Kraâis ye ye aè m ce yi tu aè ñwáè tañshi tañshïû ñgoèr ka'. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e m ce ye. E m ce ye wa'a, a laa enáê, “AÈ yu muu waè, máè ba yoè ta ká' e ntïìni na.”	"So also Christ didn't glorify himself to be made a high priest, but it was he who said to him, ""You are my Son. Today I have become your father."""
Jisoès aè m duè a cu mbe ndaèp mbe Matïìyoè, a ce yeñger. Ku' ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a vúê, a cute, a ce yeñger a Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe.	It happened as he sat in the house, behold, many tax collectors and sinners came and sat down with Jesus and his disciples.
Mbò wɛ̀ yɛ enɛ yuu anà zhi yu yɛɛnì a?	Have you not seen that the thing is nice?
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Pailáèt aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè laèa yuu neè máè ka' a? Mboè wáè rïìñ wáná m túr ñger aè rmaè'shi wáè tá aè du yo yu, a ker túr ñger aè rtaa wáè mbe kïìntaa a?”	"Pilate therefore said to him, ""Aren't you speaking to me? Don't you know that I have power to release you, and have power to crucify you?"""
njobeè' máè suèu embe buèu a rgeèe ba yuu ce m koèñ ka'. Máè vúè a rgeèe ba yuu ce ñwáè ce e m tuu máè koèñ.	For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè a be neè fa Joân aè shañ ka'.	For John was not yet thrown into prison.
Wɛ̀ cùʼni mdip e njer lɛʼ wɛ a?	Have you poured all the water from the calabash?
tá seèe ce seèe cu bteèe a ba' aè nfeè' anaè, ka' tarshi nyor seèe woweèe mbe múè mmbaè', duè koni Tata mbekïì tá seèe woweèe cu nfeseè.	then we who are alive, who are left, will be caught up together with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air. So we will be with the Lord forever.
Rshentee li ko' woweèe seê, woweèe a ká' a ce seèesi njáèá yuu ce aède' a gee neè Jisoès.	But they were filled with rage, and talked with one another about what they might do to Jesus.
Woweèe a ka' baè' a yá ñwáè moè' ce e m kepñger, ká' embe nfeè' ce a m bi ye. Ñwáè anaè aè m cu a cuâu ñka' ce a m beèe Ndap Nyúè aègho. A m ce too cuâu ñka' anaè ená Rboèñ. A m ce byáè' ye aè mnoèñ wááwá ce cuusi njep cuâu ñka' anaè tá e bo ce loo mbaèa ese beèe ce a m ce vúè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè.	A certain man who was lame from his mother's womb was being carried, whom they laid daily at the door of the temple which is called Beautiful, to ask gifts for the needy of those who entered into the temple.
Weèe fa too ñwáè moè' enjep ñgoèñ na ená Taèr ka', njobeè' weèe ku túr Taèr moè'sir caè'caè', e ba mbe buèu.	Call no man on the earth your father, for one is your Father, he who is in heaven.
A mbuèu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m vúè njep ñgoèñ na a laa neè Nyúè enáê, “Wáè m koèñ btañshïì ba mfa ka'. Wáè m fa máè ba nyor tá m bo geèe yuu ce wáè koèñ aègho.	"Therefore when he comes into the world, he says, ""Sacrifice and offering you didn't desire, but you prepared a body for me;"
Beèe magoèr efa woweèe ce a m ba ñgaâa tú', a m vúè neè wap mñwaè' tú' a lá aèbee, a too aè bsii beèe wááwá. A ka' beè' mbaèa ce a m yuu mñwaè' anaè aègho a yá ená aè m ba mmalaèr mntaê.	Many of those who practiced magical arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all. They counted the price of them, and found it to be fifty thousand pieces of silver.
Kapshi mdip njep lɛʼ.	Fill the calabash with water.
Máè faè' a tee rlïì', a sáê, mmirlo mi gaa máè mnoèñ aèñgoo. Njeè aè yañ máè, ntee yi yuushïì, máè konïì yuu ye ka' nfeè' aèñgoo. Mbáp aè m fúte máè, máè túr yuu yar foñ ka'.	in labor and travail, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, and in cold and nakedness.
Woweèe a m ce loè fyeni yaèp buu, ce loèr mbaèa efa gho ce gaèpshi fa waâp mú aèmboè ñwáè aè m buu yuu.	They sold their possessions and goods, and distributed them to all, according as anyone had need.
Mñgúè' nyor mo' ce seèe ce yá yiseèe ená vi túr mfaè' ka' naè, vi ka' buu, seèe yu' rboèñ ka'.	No, much rather, those members of the body which seem to be weaker are necessary.
Geèe laè neè buu ce vi be ce duèñshi ená weèe aè kupse, a ma' yeè buu bbebep.	Therefore bring forth fruit worthy of repentance!
E m yááti neè beèe wááwá ka'. E m yááti ba neè weèr ce Nyúè aè m ce ená weèr suñ beèe aèmboè ye, weèr aè ba beèe ce weèr aè m yeñger a ker noñger aèbee weèr woweèe aè nfeè' ce e m fúú efa rkwe.	not to all the people, but to witnesses who were chosen before by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
Zhìi mâ à tuu ye e ce sʉʉsʉ.	Her mother sent her and she is grumbling.
Woweèe a ce laèa neè weèe enáê, “Weèe fa geèe cena ka', weèe fa ye cena ka', weèe fa joèo cena ka'.”	Don't handle, nor taste, nor touch
Bfúr waê, aè ka' ba njobeè' bláá Jisoès, seèe túr ñger seè'ni aè rniñ mbe dïû' rara ce yi caa ñger naè, keè' wáp yuu mo' ka'.	Having therefore, brothers, boldness to enter into the holy place by the blood of Jesus,
Yɛʼni boo woo àmbò a ke loo.	Teach your children how to pray.
Yú' ce seèe aè koni yu yú' enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Yú' ce seèe aè koni yu yú' ce yi loè ese Nyúè. Yú' ca yi ke geèe seèe riñ buu ce Nyúè aè fa neè seèe.	But we received, not the spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that were freely given to us by God.
E naètïû aè ñgoâñ beèe Kaldïìyaè, a du a cu aè rla' Háraèn. Yïì ta aè ka' kwe, Nyúè aè fúr ye a vú aègho faèdïì' ce weèe ce cu na.	Then he came out of the land of the Chaldaeans, and lived in Haran. From there, when his father was dead, God moved him into this land, where you are now living.
M ce laèa ca ba aèmboè weèe wááwá ka'. M rïìñ beèe ce máè ce. Geewa'a, yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi m laèa yi be kuè ghááte aèmboè a m sañ enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce weèr ye aè m ce ye byee aèbee, aè m kúti yaè ñwáè bbaèa.’	I don't speak concerning all of you. I know whom I have chosen. But that the Scripture may be fulfilled, 'He who eats bread with me has lifted up his heel against me.'
A mbuèu ce máè m kwaè'shi máná aède' m ker vú ca'ni weèe ka', faè dïì' m lo geèe tá nyor bep weèe ka'.	But I determined this for myself, that I would not come to you again in sorrow.
Stáfaèn aè beesïì enáê, “Bfúr wa ba wa btaê, yu' neè yuu ce m be laèa. Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè foèo aè m yááti neè Abraèham ce e m ba yeèr ta aè nfeè' ce e m ba aè ñgoâñ Máèsoèpoètámïìyaè ka' naètïû aèfo duè cu aè rla' Háraèn naè,	"He said, ""Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he lived in Haran,"
Weèr aè ka' caèni aè ryá weèe goèr wa'a, a moo aè rcu laèr. Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèr aè kwa'shïì ená weèr be tuu Timotïì tá e vú yá weèe tá weèr ku di' boèñlaèr cu aè rla' Atáèn. Timotïì yu nfúr weèr ce weèr woweèe e ke faè' neè Nyúè. Ye ye e ke feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis neè beèe. Weèr aè tuu ye ená e vú yá weèe tá e bo fa weèe ñger, geèe tá weèe táá tatap njep le rbyemïì,	Therefore, when we couldn't stand it any longer, we thought it good to be left behind at Athens alone,
E dù a lor nè zhii bo.	He went and took it himself.
Seèe rïìñ seená Nyúè aè geèe buu wááwá ce vi koni aè kútïì ba rboèñ neè beèe ce a koèñ ye, ce yu beèe ce e ká' aèmboè e m koèñ aè rgeèe efa rkáè'.	We know that all things work together for good for those who love God, to those who are called according to his purpose.
Nyúè aè m ce seèe tá e bo maè' ñgá' mbe seâe nduè ka'. E m ce seèe ená seèe bo koni rluèñ njïì enjep Tata Jisos Kraêis,	For God didn't appoint us to wrath, but to the obtaining of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ,
Zhìi maa à yar cɛ̌ʼ sii.	His mother has worn a black dress.
Yu ye Nyúè ce e geèe seèe aè táá tatap njep Kraêis. Yu ye ce e ce seèe aè yïì beèe,	Now he who establishes us with you in Christ, and anointed us, is God;
Jisoès aè laa yuu ka' koo múcaèr, govanoè aè bááñgeèr seê.	He gave him no answer, not even one word, so that the governor marveled greatly.
E mʉ goŋni mɛ̀ enɛ wèr ye du cɛme nsuu.	He invited me that we should go and clear a farm.
Sò be kèe dù haʼŋgàani.	We will go next year.
Nyúè aè m ká' weèe ená weèe ka' ce yá ñgá', weèe kur ntee, njobeè' Kraâis ye ye aè m yá ñgá' a weâe btuè. E m geèe wa'a, aè ba ncoèo ená weèe aè ba geèe wa'a foñ.	For to this you were called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example, that you should follow his steps,
Beèe ce a m ye, a m ba aèmboè ncúèkïì kyeèe. E laa woweèe a duseè,	Those who had eaten were about four thousand. Then he sent them away.
M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená aè be kuè cu mbe shañ anaè caar, laè' yi mbaèa ce yi yu neè wáè wááwá, ka' fúú embo.	Most certainly I tell you, you shall by no means get out of there, until you have paid the last penny.
Fa kèr kèʼ mɛ̀ kaʼ.	Donʼt look at me again.
Maèsaè Tïìyofiloès, má máè foñ aè ka' fyá' buu ca wááwá boèñboñ aèmboè vi m ba efa rkáè', a yá máná yi yu boèñboñ foñ neè máè aè rsañ buu anaè yáánïì aèmboè vi m ba, fa neè wáè,	it seemed good to me also, having traced the course of all things accurately from the first, to write to you in order, most excellent Theophilus;
E beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè be be' yuu ce Dávïìd aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce njeè aè m ce yañ ye ker ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba naè ka' a?	"He said to them, ""Did you never read what David did, when he had need, and was hungry--he, and those who were with him?"
Ñkúú Agripaè, wáè byemi yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa a? Máè rïìñ máná wáè byemi.”	"King Agrippa, do you believe the prophets? I know that you believe."""
Weèe yu bkwaèa Jisos Kraâis njobeè' e m yuu weèe aè ntaa nluèuluu. Weèe fa ba bkwaèa ba neè beèe ka'.	You were bought with a price. Don't become bondservants of men.
E ba laa enɛ e be vʉ̀ ntìni.	He said that he will come today.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni njobeè' weâe ke suè'si ndoñ ba kañ embe nduè, geewa'a, a fyá' njep mú vi ruu neè buu ce weèe aè koo ese beèe aè ñger, ker ba buu ce weèe ku ce geèe ba aèmboè weèe aè gwáá.	"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you clean the outside of the cup and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and unrighteousness.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	26	Weâe beèe Farïìsi ce weèe aè feèp, suè'si ndoñ ba enjep mú entoèmbïì tá e bo ba nrara embe nduè.	You blind Pharisee, first clean the inside of the cup and of the platter, that its outside may become clean also.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	27	Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni njobeè' weèe yu aèmboè msheè ce a boo a yo' mi ce keè' mmboèñmboñ enjep mbeè, wá fyá' njep mú, mi ruu neè bvúp beèe ce a kweñger, ba buu ce vi yu bjaèpri.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you are like whitened tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful, but inwardly are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness."
E ká' a ce laèa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈmboè máè beè' nlaâa Nyúè ca neè weèe ntïìni, weèe aè yu' na, yi ku ghááte njo.”	"He began to tell them, ""Today, this Scripture has been fulfilled in your hearing."""
E m naèti a du cárcár seê, a du a yá nfúr yïû Saimún Pitaè a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè yá Máèsayaè.” Rlii ca li yu ená Kraêis (ñwáè ce a ghar).	"He first found his own brother, Simon, and said to him, ""We have found the Messiah!"" (which is, being interpreted, Christ)."
Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè Muu baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' kani efa rbyemi neè Muu yïì baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ ka'. Nyúè be cápshi nteèe neè ñwáè anaè nfeseè.”	"One who believes in the Son has eternal life, but one who disobeys the Son won't see life, but the wrath of God remains on him."""
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè nje rla' enje weâe cuèu na. Weèe be duè niñ tá weèe ku yá muu jaèaki' ce ñwáè aè m be cu mbo ka' aèmboè a cúú. Wee yá, weèe fyáá vú aègho.	"and said to them, ""Go your way into the village that is opposite you. Immediately as you enter into it, you will find a young donkey tied, on which no one has sat. Untie him, and bring him."
Woweèe a ce yá'ni ndeèe to' moè' ce yiseèe ncir yi byemi ená seèe gee ka'. Seèe yu yiseèe beâe aè to' Ruêm.”	"and set forth customs which it is not lawful for us to accept or to observe, being Romans."""
Cete kèŋ fàdìʼ mbɛp bo fʉte wɛ̀ kaʼ.	Close the door so that you will not feel cool.
Sondɛ e ke ba mmbomntaa Nyʉ̀.	Sunday is Godʼs resting day.
Woweèe a ka' yu', a ku'si Nyúè, a laa neè Pol enáê, “Nfúêr, wáè yá aèmboè Jus ce a byemi a yu aè mncúèkïì aè mncúèkïì, woweèe wááwá a túr ntee aè rláè ncir seê.	"They, when they heard it, glorified God. They said to him, ""You see, brother, how many thousands there are among the Jews of those who have believed, and they are all zealous for the law."
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, aède' m du fa wáâ mbuèu seè'ni ka' njoká? M be kwe njo' wáè.”	"Peter said to him, ""Lord, why can't I follow you now? I will lay down my life for you."""
Nfeè' ce weèe aè m ce geèe buu ce beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ce geèe naè, aè gháá wa'a. Woweèe a ce geèe mnyáâr, a ce geèe yuu ce wap bláá vi ce luèute aè rgeèe. Woweèe a ce no buu vi ce koo woweèe, a ce geèe mñkaè' bghaa, a ce geèe mñkaè' no buu, a ce loo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ce Nyúè aè kani ená beèe a fa loo neè vi ka'.	For we have spent enough of our past time doing the desire of the Gentiles, and having walked in lewdness, lusts, drunken binges, orgies, carousings, and abominable idolatries.
Abraèham aè ka' kur ntee, ce bu' ka', a koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè ye naè.	Thus, having patiently endured, he obtained the promise.
Buu bteèe ce kyeèe caè vi laa enáê, “Yi yu wa'a.” Vi ka' laèa wa'a, beâe bgoèrgoèr caè a gú'shïì neè woweèe.	"The four living creatures said, ""Amen!"" The elders fell down and worshiped."
Wɛ̀ mʉ laa enɛ à be vʉ̀, a diʼ a vʉ kaʼ njokɛ?	You said that you will come and finally did not come why?
AÈpoloès aè ka' taè' aè rduè aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè, bfúr ce aè rla' Áfásoès a fa ye ñger, a ker sañ ñwaè' neè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès ce a m ba aèfo ená woweèe a koni ye. E ka' baè', a ja' beèe ce a m byemi njobeè' Nyúè aè m túr woweèe aè ntee boèñboñ naè.	When he had determined to pass over into Achaia, the brothers encouraged him, and wrote to the disciples to receive him. When he had come, he greatly helped those who had believed through grace;
E byɛ̀ʼ ŋguu mbe mbɛ̀ʼ.	He has carried firewood on the shoulder.
Mɛ̀ ba yɛ ŋgàabaa mlùu mi koo mɛ̀ sê.	I saw the mad man and was full of fear.
Jisoès aè m ba mbaè njïì keñ, a lá yi tu mbe mbuu, a ce buumi. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a yáá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, aè ce yá wáná weèr ce kweñger njep roè na ka' a?”	"He himself was in the stern, asleep on the cushion, and they woke him up, and told him, ""Teacher, don't you care that we are dying?"""
Jisoès aè ká'shïì woweèe aèbee, a laa enáê, “Weèe rïìñ weená ñgaâa rsa' beèe enje jáá a ke sa' yap beèe neè ñger-ñwáè seê, beâe bgoèrgoèr mo' a lor yap ñger, nyú' beèe aègho foñ.	"But Jesus summoned them, and said, ""You know that the rulers of the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them."
E m tuu beèe mo' entombïì. Woweèe a du a niñ aè rla' moâ' aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaèè tá a bo fyá' dïì', kupshi buu neè ye.	and sent messengers before his face. They went, and entered into a village of the Samaritans, so as to prepare for him.
E yá aèmboè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ce ni'ni neè keñ, njobeè' fu' yi m ce caèa magoèr. AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', e du a waâp mbuèu, a ce jáèr mbenduè rdip, a ce roèo caèa woweèe.	Seeing them distressed in rowing, for the wind was contrary to them, about the fourth watch of the night he came to them, walking on the sea, and he would have passed by them,
njobeè' weèe yi ená weèe ka' so rmoèoshïì ca baná li be geèe tá weèe túr ñger aè rtáá tatap.	knowing that the testing of your faith produces endurance.
Bkeñ mo' vi m vúâ aè rla' Tïìbárïìyaès, a vú a ba' faèdïì' ce beèe a m ye bráâd ce Tata Jisoès aè m yoèñshi Nyúè aètu mo naè.	However boats from Tiberias came near to the place where they ate the bread after the Lord had given thanks.
Bfeè' vi ka' caâa btaar, máè du aè rlaè' Jáèrusaláèm tá m bo lááte weèr Pitaè. Máè m cu weèr ye aè mnoèñ ncoèp-ta-aè-rrúèú.	Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter, and stayed with him fifteen days.
Tá e ka' keè vúè, Joân aè m feè'shi neè beèe Isráèl wááwá ená woweèe a kupse, ma'shi yaèp buu bbebep tá a baptir woweèe.	before his coming, when John had first preached the baptism of repentance to Israel.
Jisoès aè ka' naèa mmir yá aèmboè kúr beèe a ce vúè aè ryá ye, e laa neè Felep enáê, “Seèe be yuu byee ba efá tá beèe ca a ka' ye?”	"Jesus therefore lifting up his eyes, and seeing that a great multitude was coming to him, said to Philip, ""Where are we to buy bread, that these may eat?"""
Felep ca aè m ba ñwáâ aè rla' Báètsaidaè aèmboè Andruè ba Saimún Pitaè a m ba.	Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.
Gèe cɛr tɛ sò bo ce dù.	Hurry up so that we should be going.
Ñwáè ce e m koo yi ncúèkïì moè'sir naè aè du a tuñ beè'teè a súti mbaèa anaè njo.	But he who received the one went away and dug in the earth, and hid his lord's money.
Buu ce woweèe a m yá aèfo vi m wápsi woweèe seê. Musïìs ye ye aè m laèa enáê, “M ce wáp a ce kaèñ.”	"and so fearful was the appearance, that Moses said, ""I am terrified and trembling."""
Zhi yu fyɛ̀pte.	It is airless.
Yi ke fa beèe mo' bfee aè rgeèe buu bghagha', ker fa beèe mo' bfee aè rcep ntuu Nyúè. Yi ke fa beèe mo' bfee aè rrïìñ buu ce vi loè ese Yú' Nyúè, ker riñ vïì ce vi loè ese Yú' Nyúè ka'. Yi ke fa beèe mo' bfee aè rlaèa bli ce a m be yá'ni ka', ker fa beèe mo' bfee aè rsuñ beèe buu ce a laèa aè bli anaè.	and to another workings of miracles; and to another prophecy; and to another discerning of spirits; to another different kinds of languages; and to another the interpretation of languages.
Ñwáè ka' ba ñwáè rfaè' neè Tataê, ñgaèñ fa ba ñwáè mnsár ka'. E ba ba ñwáâ nyáánïì, ba ñwáè ce e rïìñ aè ryá'nïì, ba ñwáè ce e kur ntee.	The Lord's servant must not quarrel, but be gentle towards all, able to teach, patient,
Mboè weèe ce kuushi bráâd saèamba ce a m nyañ beèe ncúèkïì kyeèe aègho naè, ker ba mñkaèa ce weèe aè m baashi bbábá' aègho naè ka' a?	Nor the seven loaves for the four thousand, and how many baskets you took up?
Woweèe a m rïìñ mbuèu ce e m laèa wa' ka'.	They didn't understand the saying which he spoke to them.
Cùu zhi kʉʉ muu wàa.	My child has been attacked by thrush.
Mɛ̀ ku yuʼ ba àmŋoo.	I only heard through rumours.
Mɛ̀ zhe baa a yuʼ.	I have eaten food to my satisfaction.
Jisoès aè riñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce kwaè'shi njáèá buu bbebep ca wa' njoká?	"Jesus, knowing their thoughts, said, ""Why do you think evil in your hearts?"
Mñgúâr ce mi ce ye woweèe njo mi be kweñger ka', tá mor anaè yi liiti ka'.	where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.'
Rlii rkaèñsïì anaè li m ba enáê, “Ñgúè cece'.” Rkaèñsïì anaè li m geèe ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa mdip mi ce'. Beèe magoèr a m no mdip anaè a kweñger njobeè' mi m ce ce'.	"The name of the star is called ""Wormwood."" One third of the waters became wormwood. Many people died from the waters, because they were made bitter."
Ku' beèe a vúê, a yá ye mbo. Woweèe a m vúè neè beèe ce a m ba mntáèñ, ba beèe ce a m kepñger, ba mnfeèp, ba blúr, ker ba beèe magoèr ce a m ce yañ, a lá njep yeâ tïìi, e gee woweèe a ke'seè.	Great multitudes came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, maimed, and many others, and they put them down at his feet. He healed them,
Mntúñ bluèr vi m ba aèfo vi ntuunfu. AÈ m ba mntúñ ce Jus a m ce tár mdip njo tá a bo ce suè'si nyor aègho, ce ba brara aè bsii Nyúè. AÈde' bgaloèn mdip vi m ba ku du njep ntúñ moè'sir aèmboè mmbaa du ba' mntaar wa'a.	Now there were six water pots of stone set there after the Jews' way of purifying, containing two or three metretes apiece.
E m duè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè nfeè' ce AÈbïìyataè aè m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a lor bráâd ce a m fa neè Nyúè, a ye, a fa bár neè beèe ce a woweèe a m ba. Ncir yi m byemi ená ñwáè moè' jáá ye caa efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ka'.”	"How he entered into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest, and ate the show bread, which is not lawful to eat except for the priests, and gave also to those who were with him?"""
E m geèe ená seèe ba boo vi tá seèe bo kuè'si ye njobeè' e m geèe yuu boèñboñ neè seèe. E m geèe yuu anaè neè seèe aè cicïì. Seèe aè koni yi njo' muu yïì ce e koèñ se naè.	to the praise of the glory of his grace, by which he freely bestowed favor on us in the Beloved,
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ca a ka' mïìsi, máè yá aèmboè Ndap Nyúè embe buèu aè múè'ti. E ka' múè'ti, máè yá ñkuèp leâ' Nyúè ce e m ba mbo. Mbeèñ aè bapñgeèr, a rúúñger, a wañger, nshe aè ci'tïì, ku' mghoèo mi gweê.	God's temple that is in heaven was opened, and the ark of the Lord's covenant was seen in his temple. Lightnings, sounds, thunders, an earthquake, and great hail followed.
E keèr laèa aèmboè ñwáè e ke laèa, laa enáê, “M be láè buu wááwá mbe mmbo Nyúè.” E m ker laa foñ enáê, “Yá laè máè weèr boo ce Nyúè aè fa neè máè.”	"Again, ""I will put my trust in him."" Again, ""Behold, here I am with the children whom God has given me."""
“Nfúroè aè ka' gee yuu bebep neè wáè, aè du yá ye, suñ ye. Suñ ye aè nfeè' ce ku ba weèe ye beèe a mmbaa. E ka' byemïì ená e geèe yuu bebep, baná wáè geèe weèe ye aè ker kúti bfúr.	"If your brother sins against you, go, show him his fault between you and him alone. If he listens to you, you have gained back your brother.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	16	E ka' tá yu' ka', aè lor ñwáè moè'sir káè beèe a mmbaa áè, tá yi bo ba ená beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mntaar áè, a táá njïìnsa' aè yuu wááwá ce weèe ye aè laèa.	But if he doesn't listen, take one or two more with you, that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	17	E ka' tá keèr yu' ka', aè suñ neè coêr. E ka' kani foñ efa ryu' yuu ce cor aè laèa, aè lor ye tá e ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e rïìñ Nyúè ka', káè aèmboè ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' wa'a.	If he refuses to listen to them, tell it to the assembly. If he refuses to hear the assembly also, let him be to you as a Gentile or a tax collector.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	18	“M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená yuu ce weèe aè ka' kur njep ñgoèñ na, baná a be kur yi mbe buèu. Yuu ce weèe aè ka' fyááshi njep ñgoèñ na, baná a be fyáèáshi yi mbe buèu.	Most certainly I tell you, whatever things you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven, and whatever things you release on earth will have been released in heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	19	M ker ce suñ weèe ená beèe a mmbaa efa weâe mú ce weèe yu njep ñgoèñ na, a ka' ce loo, byemi aè yuu ce woweèe ce loo ená Nyúè gee neè woweèe baná yaè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu be geèe yuu anaè.	Again, assuredly I tell you, that if two of you will agree on earth concerning anything that they will ask, it will be done for them by my Father who is in heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	20	Yi yu wa'a njobeè' faèdïì' ce beèe a mmbaa káè beèe a mntaar áè, a ka' vú aèbee a máâ rlii, baná m be ba aèfo weèr woweèe.”	For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there I am in the midst of them."
Woweèe a ka' vúè baè' mbe Jisoès a yá ená e ba kwe wáá, a ke' kepshi mkuèu mi ka'.	but when they came to Jesus, and saw that he was already dead, they didn't break his legs.
Beèe Saduèsi a kani ená nfúú-efa-rkwe yu aègho ka', a ker kani ená bcïìndap Nyúè ker ba byú' vi yu aègho ka'. Beèe Farïìsi a byemïì ená buu ca wááwá yu aègho.	For the Sadducees say that there is no resurrection, nor angel, nor spirit; but the Pharisees confess all of these.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Weèe yo mbaèa anaè du bú aè cicïì njobeè' aè ce kwaè'shi ená aède' aè yuu rfa Nyúè neè mbaèa!	"But Peter said to him, ""May your silver perish with you, because you thought you could obtain the gift of God with money!"
Yi yu mini ená ñwáè rbyemïì moè' ka' ce loèr moè' ce duè aègho mbe koêr, baná weèe aè gweè. Yi yu aèndeèe ená weèe aè ba borni ye yu, leèse faèa ce beèe a geèe neè weèe tá a fip weèe, neè ce weèe lor woweèe duè aègho mbe koêr.	Therefore it is already altogether a defect in you, that you have lawsuits one with another. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded?
“Baná m ce suñ weèe ená mluè mi fa ce koo weèe neè yeè nyor ená weèe be ye ká, káè no ká ka'. Mluè mi fa ce koo weèe neè yeè nyor foñ ená weèe be yar ba ká ka'. Mboè ryoâñ ñwáè li caèa byee, nyor ñwáè aè caa bcáè' a?	Therefore, I tell you, don't be anxious for your life: what you will eat, or what you will drink; nor yet for your body, what you will wear. Isn't life more than food, and the body more than clothing?
Seèe rïìñ seená yuu ce mncir Nyúè vi ce laèa, vi ce laèa ba neè beèe ce Nyúè aè m fa mncir anaè neè woweèe. Yi yu wa'a tá ñwáè moè' bo laèa ená e yu yi jáá ka', tá beèe wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na a bo keè táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè, tañshi yaèp nsa' neè ye.	Now we know that whatever things the law says, it speaks to those who are under the law, that every mouth may be closed, and all the world may be brought under the judgment of God.
Woowèe a kuushi nè yap tu.	They remembered it themselves.
AÈ nfeè' ce m yu njep ñgoèñ na, m yu rraa neè ñgoèñ.”	"While I am in the world, I am the light of the world."""
Ncïìndap Nyúè ca aè m túr ntuu aè rcep neè muunje moè', ce ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Josáèf aè m ce niñ guèu aègho. Josáèf aè m ba ñwáè embe ndúè' ñkúú Dávïìd. A m too rlii muunje anaè ená Máèári.	to a virgin pledged to be married to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. The virgin's name was Mary.
Musïìs aè m laèa yi enáê, ‘Tata Nyúè be keè fúr ñwáè ntuu efa weâe mú aèmboè e m fúr máè naè. Weèe be keè yu' buu wááwá ce e be keè laèa neè weèe, geèe vi.	For Moses indeed said to the fathers, 'The Lord God will raise up a prophet for you from among your brothers, like me. You shall listen to him in all things whatever he says to you.
Pailáèt aè ker fúú embe nto' a laa neè Jus enáê, “Yá neè, m be fúr ñwáè ca njepmbeè tá weèe bo rïìñ ená máè yá faèa moè' ce e geèe ka'.”	"Then Pilate went out again, and said to them, ""Behold, I bring him out to you, that you may know that I find no basis for a charge against him."""
Ŋgàŋ yu a ŋwɛ̀ gòr.	The man is an important person.
Mkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m kaè', mi yu neè weèe ba boo wee, ker ba beèe wááwá ce a yu aènjïìsaèp ba beèe wááwá ce yïìseèe Tata Nyúè aè m ká' ená a ba yïì beèe.”	"For the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all who are far off, even as many as the Lord our God will call to himself."""
I have littleghɛɛ 61 ghùni 61 2-Limbum-English Dictionary-jb.	doc money and it is sufficient.
Yi yu mini ená ncir yi laèa ená buu wááwá vi yu brara aè bsii Nyúè, ce a ka' ñwañshi neè bláá. Baná bláá vi ka' tá ba ka', a foosïì buu bbebep beèe ka'.	According to the law, nearly everything is cleansed with blood, and apart from shedding of blood there is no remission.
Woweèe a fa laèa yuu bebep aèmboè ñwáè moè' ka, borni mlap, gee buu neè rbonïì-ñwáè, ba múfáèá aè yap ñgeèe neè beèe wááwá, aè nfeè' wááwá.	to speak evil of no one, not to be contentious, to be gentle, showing all humility toward all men.
Máè rïìñ máná ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá m buu aègho. Tata Jisos Kraâis aè m suñ máè wa'a.	knowing that the putting off of my tent comes swiftly, even as our Lord Jesus Christ made clear to me.
a ka' baè', a yá gúâú ñwáè njep rsheè ka'. A ka' yá ka', a kúti a laa ená woweèe a yá njáèá rlo mo' aèmboè bcïìndap Nyúè, bcïìndap Nyúè anaè a suñ woweèe ená e ku cu nteèe.	and when they didn't find his body, they came saying that they had also seen a vision of angels, who said that he was alive.
Bkar vi wááwá ba bbyeèñge ce a m loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a du a yeâ mbuèu, a m táá aènjïìsaèp, a ce yá buu ca.	All his acquaintances, and the women who followed with him from Galilee, stood at a distance, watching these things.
Máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e ce fáñ mbe buèu. E m ce vúè neè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, aè ba nsuñ ce e be mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'. E m ce vúè tá e bo suñ nsuñ anaè neè beèe wááwá ce a ce cu njep ñgoèñ na, a ba aè mntáè' wááwá ce vi yu aè bto' wááwá, a ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá.	I saw an angel flying in mid heaven, having an eternal Good News to proclaim to those who dwell on the earth, and to every nation, tribe, language, and people.
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe rïìñ weená ncir yi yá'ni ená ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè Jus kar káè ca'ni ñwáè enje jáá ka'. Geewa'a, Nyúè aè geèe máè riñ máná aède' m ker lor ñwáè moè' aèmboè ñwáè ce aède' weèr ye buu efa rkar ka'.	"He said to them, ""You yourselves know how it is an unlawful thing for a man who is a Jew to join himself or come to one of another nation, but God has shown me that I shouldn't call any man unholy or unclean."
“Ñwáè ryá'nïì, Musïìs aè m sañ ncir neè seèe ená ñwáè aè ka' lor ñgwa, a ye a bi boo ka', ñgaèñ kwe, baná nfúr yïì be laasi ye, tá a ye a bi boo neè nfúr yïì ce e kwe anaè.	"They asked him, ""Teacher, Moses wrote to us that if a man's brother dies having a wife, and he is childless, his brother should take the wife, and raise up children for his brother."
Bvisèe vi bʉŋger wɛɛ.	These are Ndiʼs calabashes.
(E m laèa wa'a njobeè' Jisoès aè m laèa enáê, “Fúú enjep ñwáè ca, wáâ yú' bebep.”)	"For he said to him, ""Come out of the man, you unclean spirit!"""
Bfúr waê, yuu m ce laèa yi yu ená nfeè' Nyúè aè fa seèe yu nlúè'shi. Baná ká' e seè'ni na, beèe wááwá ce a túr bbyeèñge, a cu aèmboè a yu lá bkúè wa'a.	But I say this, brothers: the time is short, that from now on, both those who have wives may be as though they had none;
Ñwáè ce e ka' fa ye bo, baná a ñgaèñ a geèe bsaèrbuu anaè bsïìp.	for he who welcomes him participates in his evil works.
Máè beesïì mánáê, ‘Tataê, a wáè nda?’ Tata aè laa enáê, ‘A máè Jisoès ce aè ce jar neè ye naè.	I said, 'Who are you, Lord?' He said, 'I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting.
E ka' ce jáèr ce caèa aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè anaè, a ba' aè rla' mo' ce a m ce too ená Sikaè. Rla' ca li m ba aègee ñkúè ce Jakoèp aè m fa neè muu yïû Josáèf.	So he came to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son, Joseph.
A ŋwɛɛ bìi àmbò e m̀ vʉ̀.	It is a full month since she came.
E m ghááte aè rgeèe wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè m kuè'si ye aè tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba naè.	named by God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek.
Ñwáâ ñgoèr ca aè ka' yu' ená Jisoès aè naètïû aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a vú aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, e du a yá ye, a bu' mmbo neè ye ená a ye a du aè rla' Kaèpanuèm tá e bo gee muu yïì ce e m ce yañ a ku ba yïû ñkwe, ke'se.	When he heard that Jesus had come out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him, and begged him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was at the point of death.
Nyúè aè m ka' geèe Jisoès aè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì, a kaêa, a laa neè ye enáê, “Máâ Taèr, máè kaèa ená aè be ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì nfeseè. AÈde' ya nlaèa ca yi kupseè ka'”	"(for they indeed have been made priests without an oath), but he with an oath by him that says of him, ""The Lord swore and will not change his mind, 'You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek.'"""
M túr fáñ aè rgeèe rfaâ' rboèñboñ aèfa, ka' beèe magoèr a yu ce a koèñ aè rjepsi la rfaè' wa'a.	for a great and effective door has opened to me, and there are many adversaries.
Nyúè aè m yá ená yi m ghááte ka'. Seèe rïìñ wa'a njobeè' e m laèa enáê, “Nfeè' moè' be keè ba ce m be ye leâ' fi weèr beèe Isráèl ba beèe Judaè. Nlaèa ca aè laèa máâ Tata Nyúè.	"For finding fault with them, he said, ""Behold, the days come,"" says the Lord, ""that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah;"
Ñwáè rfaè' anaè aè gwe njep yeâ tïìi, a bu' mmbo neè ye, a laa enáê, ‘Fa máè mú nfeè' moè' tá m roo mbaèa, laè' rkaa anaè wááwá.’	The servant therefore fell down and kneeled before him, saying, 'Lord, have patience with me, and I will repay you all!'
Mmbañruè ca a ka' maè'shi Jisoès ce duè, Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Masaè, yi boèñ aèmboè seèe yu aèfa na. Maè'shi tá weèr ba'ri btaèp vïû btaar, tá moè' ba yo, mo' ba yïì Musïìs, tá mo' ba yïì AÈlajaè.” E m laèa wa'a, a riñ yuu ce e m ce laèa ka'.	"It happened, as they were parting from him, that Peter said to Jesus, ""Master, it is good for us to be here. Let's make three tents: one for you, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah,"" not knowing what he said."
“Ñwáè ryá'nïì, ncir ce yi caèa mncir wááwá embe ñwaè' mncir yu yïû fá?”	Teacher, which is the greatest commandment in the law?
Jakoèp aè bi Josáèf ce e m ba nduu yïì Máèári ce e m bi Jisoès ce a ce too ená Kraêis.	Jacob became the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary, from whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
Rkìŋ rlap rli yu nè wèr.	Their pot is with us.
Woweèe a natïì a du aè bbu' mla' jáá jáèá jáá a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, a ce geèe ñgaâa byañ a ce keè'se aè bdïì' wááwá ce woweèe a m ce duè.	They departed, and went throughout the villages, preaching the Good News, and healing everywhere.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè ku' ñgá' aè ká' aètu buu ce a m ce yá'ni kuu nduunjïû Tataê.	About that time there arose no small stir concerning the Way.
E yɛ nè li rlir.	He saw it himself.
AÈde' ñwáè ce a ce yá'ni ye, caa ñwáè ryá'nïì ka'. Geewa'a, a ka' yá'ni ñwáè boèñboñ baná ñgaèñ be ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e yá'ni ye.	A disciple is not above his teacher, but everyone when he is fully trained will be like his teacher.
Beèe magoèr ce a yu entombïì seè'ni na, a be keè ba elúèsimbuèu, tá beèe magoèr ce a yu lúèsimbuèu seè'ni na, a ba entombïì.”	"But many who are first will be last; and the last first."""
Kuushi neè beèe ce a m ba btu neè wee, a fe'shi blaâa Nyúè neè weèe naè. Kwaè'shi neè aèmboè rcu beèe anaè li m ba, byemi neè Nyúè foñ aèmboè woweèe a m byemi naè.	Remember your leaders, men who spoke to you the word of God, and considering the results of their conduct, imitate their faith.
blaèa anaè vi ke' taa mñgaèñ njep ye ka', ku cu ba aè nfeè' múcaèr. E ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a ce fa ye ñgá', káè buu vi ba btatap neè ye njo' blaèa anaè, e ku kúti njïìnjïì.	yet he has no root in himself, but endures for a while. When oppression or persecution arises because of the word, immediately he stumbles.
“Yáê, m ce tuu weèe tá weèe du ba aèmboè njeèe aè múè bkuura. Baná weèe feese aèmboè mnyo, ba neè rbornïì-ñwáè aèmboè bbeèñ.	"Behold, I send you out as sheep in the midst of wolves. Therefore be wise as serpents, and harmless as doves.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	17	Loèr neè nfeè' weèe beèe weèe njobeè' woweèe a be loèr weèe du aègho aè bkansuèr, lïìp weèe neè mñgwaèa aè wap mndap mloo.	But beware of men: for they will deliver you up to councils, and in their synagogues they will scourge you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	18	A be koo weèe duè aègho njeptii bgovanoè ba bkúú njo' máè, tá weèe bo suñ woweèe ker ba beèe enje jáá buu kuu máè.	Yes, and you will be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony to them and to the nations.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	19	A ka' lor weèe du aègho, mluè mi fa koo weèe ená weèe be laèa ba ká aè njáâá ká lá ka', njobeè' Nyúè be geèe tá weèe ku rïìñ yuu ce weèe be laèa aè nfeè' anaè.	But when they deliver you up, don't be anxious how or what you will say, for it will be given you in that hour what you will say.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	20	Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá ce laèa weèe ka', be laèa ba Yú' yeè Ta neè weèe.	For it is not you who speak, but the Spirit of your Father who speaks in you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	21	Ñwáè be keèe loèr nfúr yïì fa tá a yú, tá taèr lor muu yïì fa tá a yú. Boo a be keèe teèe btu neè waêp taê, ba waêp maê, loèr woweèe fa tá a yúshi.	Brother will deliver up brother to death, and the father his child. Children will rise up against parents, and cause them to be put to death."
Saèkiyoès aè natïì mbekïì a laa neè Tata enáê, “Tataê, yáê, m be to'ni yaè buu tïìtïìyáánïì, fa mbeèp moè' neè ñgaâa fuèp. Ka' ba ená máè m koo yuu ñwáè moè' aè ñger, baná m be laè' yi yuu ce máè m koo anaè bkaèñ kyeèe.”	"Zacchaeus stood and said to the Lord, ""Behold, Lord, half of my goods I give to the poor. If I have wrongfully exacted anything of anyone, I restore four times as much."""
Weèr aè maè' buu bbebep ce beèe a ke geèe aè bsúèti njo' rïìtu. Weèr ce bo' beèe ka', a ce kupse blaâa Nyúè ka'. Weèr ce feè'shi buu mini aèwañ, aè bsii Nyúè. Weèr ce geèe wa'a, ñwáè wááwá aè ce kwaè'shi boèñboñ aèmboè weèr.	But we have renounced the hidden things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor handling the word of God deceitfully; but by the manifestation of the truth commending ourselves to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
Nyúè e ke so'niñgoèñ ka'.	For there is no partiality with God.
ÁÈliyuèr aè m bi ÁÈlisaè, ÁÈlisaè aè bi Mataèm, Mataèm aè bi Jakoèp,	Eliud became the father of Eleazar. Eleazar became the father of Matthan. Matthan became the father of Jacob.
Woweèe a du a yá muu jaèaki' aèmboè a cúú njep ncúèúndúè', aèwaâa nduunjïì. A ka' ce fyáèá muu jaèaki' ca,	They went away, and found a young donkey tied at the door outside in the open street, and they untied him.
Jisos Kraâis aè m yá ñgá' ca tá beèe enje jáá a bo koni efa bghoènïì ce Nyúè aè m fa neè Abraèhaêm, tá seèe ce seèe aè byemi neè Jisoès bo koni Yú' ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè yïì beèe naè njo' ye.	that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a ghááte aè beèe ce a be keè fúú efa rkwe, cu aè ñgoèñ ce yi bii ka' ba naè, a be keèr loèr bbyeèñge káè guusi boo ka',	But those who are considered worthy to attain to that age and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba bleebeèe, a tarteè mbe ndaèp mbe Kaifaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì,	Then the chief priests, the scribes, and the elders of the people were gathered together in the court of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a m koni ye a ker byemi neè ye foñ naè, e fa ñger ená woweèe a beeñger ba boo Nyúè.	But as many as received him, to them he gave the right to become God's children, to those who believe in his name:
Yú' Rara yi ce laèa rara ená be keè ba aè nfeè' moè' tá beèe mo' a ma' yuu ce a m byemi, ce yu'ni ba neè byú' ce vi ke bo' beèe, keèr ce yu' ba buu ce mnyúâmkaè' vi ce yá'ni.	But the Spirit says expressly that in later times some will fall away from the faith, paying attention to seducing spirits and doctrines of demons,
M be cu aè rla' Áfásoès na baè' aè noèñ Ñkaâ' Pántikoès.	But I will stay at Ephesus until Pentecost,
Ñgaâa rbyemïì efa múè beèe ce a m geèe búè ce a m vúè a Pitaè weèe naè, a m báèáñger se njobeè' Nyúè aè m suèusi yi Yú' mbenduè beèe enje jáá foñ.	They of the circumcision who believed were amazed, as many as came with Peter, because the gift of the Holy Spirit was also poured out on the Gentiles.
Woowèe a màʼshi yàp ndap a du kù Nsòʼ.	They left their house and went to Nso.
Woweèe a ce geèe rloo neè máè ba aè cicïì, njobeè' a ce yá'ni beèe mncir ce aè láè beèe, aèmboè a lá mncir Nyúè wa'a.’ ”	"And in vain do they worship me, teaching as doctrine rules made by men.'"""
IÌrastoès aè m cu aè rla' Koreèn, máè ma'shïì Troâfimoès aè rla' Milátáèns njobeè' e m ce yañ.	Erastus remained at Corinth, but I left Trophimus at Miletus sick.
Ñwáè aè ka' sár yuu ce aè ce yá'ni, aè cep ye. E ka' tá yu' ka' aè ker cep ye. Wáè ka' cep ye nfeè' baa e ke' yu' ka', aè fa túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe weèe ye ka'.	Avoid a factious man after a first and second warning;
Baná weèe kwa'shi yuu yi mo'sir, koñni a weâe mú, túr cuâu mo'sir; wee geèe wa' naè, m bo mïìsi lu'shi.	make my joy full, by being like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind;
Beèe mo' aè laèa ená a túr njáèá bfee ca, a ka' ce laèa wa', a da' njïì rbyemïì. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	which some professing have erred concerning the faith. Grace be with you. Amen.
“Loèr ñwaè', sañ buu ce wáè yá mbo, tuusi neè bcor ce aè rla' Áfásoès, ba Sïìmainaè, ba Págamoèm, ba Taèitiraè, ba Sadïìs, ba Fïìlaèdálfïìyaè ker ba aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè.”	"saying, ""What you see, write in a book and send to the seven assemblies: to Ephesus, Smyrna, Pergamum, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and to Laodicea."""
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Muu Ñwáè be kuè yá ñgá' goèr seê, tá bleebeèe ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a kani ye, a be yú ye, mnoèñ vi ba btaar, tá e fúú efa rkwe.”	"saying, ""The Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Naèti mbekïì, lor lo rwaèa ce duê.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Arise, take up your mat, and walk."""
Ñkaraè, waè' wáè ka' ce sa' beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca, ker ce geèe vi foñ, waè' aède' Nyúè buu efa rsa' wáè a?	Do you think this, O man who judges those who practice such things, and do the same, that you will escape the judgment of God?
Sataèn aè ker lor ye a du aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a du neè ye mbe tu Ndap Nyúè ce yi saèp mbekïì seê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ka' ba Muu Nyúè, aè nyáá ka embe na cáá njep nsheè,	"He led him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to him, ""If you are the Son of God, cast yourself down from here,"
M ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe yu'ni neè njáèá beèe ce a yu aèmboè woweèe. Ker yu'ni neè beèe ce a woweèe a ce faè' aèbee.	that you also be in subjection to such, and to everyone who helps in the work and labors.
E dù kù làʼ.	She has gone up to the compound.
a laa enáê, “M be yu'shi wo mnsa' aè nfeè' ce beèe ce weèe woweèe aè m ce sa' mnsa' mbe kansuèr naè a vúè foñ.” E m laèa ená a lor Pol du aègho mbe nto' Hároèd ce ke'nïî.	I will hear you fully when your accusers also arrive. He commanded that he be kept in Herod's palace.
Bfúr waê, weèe fa sáè aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ ka'.	But you, brothers, don't be weary in doing well.
Hálïì aè m ba muu Mataèr, Mataèr aè ba muu Lávïì, Lávïì aè ba muu Málákïì, Málákïì aè ba muu Jáènayïì, Jáènayïì aè ba muu Josáèf,	the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Jannai, the son of Joseph,
E làa enɛ muu ce e mʉ ce yaŋ nà à kwe lɛ?	Did he say that the child who was ill has died?
AÈ ka' keèr ba aè nfeè' moè' e duñshïì yïì nyor neè Jáêms, a ker lo a duñshi yïì nyor neè yi ñgaâa ntuu.	Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles,
Joân aè fa ncep neè beèe aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá wa'a, a ce feè'shi ba Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè woweèe.	Then with many other exhortations he preached good news to the people,
[Weèe ka' tá foèosi beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep neè weèe ka', baná yeè Ta embe buèu be foèosi weèe yeè buu bbebep foñ ka'.”]	"But if you do not forgive, neither will your Father in heaven forgive your transgressions."""
Kèʼ mɛ̀ mbena tɛ m̀ vʉ̂.	Wait for me here till I come.
A yi wa' wáá ka'. Seè'ni na, seèe ce lu'shi njo' yuu ce Nyúè aè geèe neè seèe njo' rkwe yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis, aè ba ye ce e m geèe seèe Nyúè weèe aè kútïì aèbee.	Not only so, but we also rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená e ka' roo yá, baná e be lu'shi aè njeèe yïû moè'sir ce e yá na, caèa yïû ncoèp-búè'ú-aè-mmbúè'ú ce yi daè' yi ka' naè.	If he finds it, most certainly I tell you, he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine which have not gone astray.
ka' byáèá áè, káè ñgaâa ñko'ndoñ áè, káè no ñkoo weèe áè, káè ñgaâa mcápni áè, káè ñgaâa faèpshi buu aè ñger áè, aède' a niñ mbo ka'.	nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor slanderers, nor extortioners, will inherit the Kingdom of God.
M ce loo neè Nyúè ce e yu Nyúè neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis a ker ba Taèr ce e yu ñwáè foèo, ená e fa weèe yi yú', tá weèe túr bfee, rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce Nyúè yu neè mini-ñwáè.	that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him;
Muu ca ce kèʼ dʉ̀ʼni àmbò nzhɛ̀ɛ waʼa.	This child looks shabby like a thief.
Beèe mo' efa múè beèe ca yu Hïìminaès ba AÈláèksandaè. Máè fa woweèe mbaè mmbo Sataèn tá woweèe a bo yá ñgá', rïìñ buu, borni efa rbepsi rlii Nyúè.	of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander; whom I delivered to Satan, that they might be taught not to blaspheme.
Ñwáè moè' ce fuñ aè ntee rïìñ a ce laèa enáê, ‘Kupshi neè nduunjïì neè Tataê, nashi tá yi ba kuèyáá.’ ”	"The voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make ready the way of the Lord! Make his paths straight!'"""
Yáê, m ce vúè seè'ni seè'ni. M be vúè neè blaè' tá m bo laè' ñwáè wááwá aèmboè li rfaè' li yu.	"Behold, I come quickly. My reward is with me, to repay to each man according to his work.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	22	13	M yu Alfaè, a ba OÈmágaè. A máè ñwáè entoèmbïì, a ba ñwáè elúèsimbuèu. A máè ñwáè ce e m káè' buu wááwá, a ba ñwáè ce e be mïìsi buu anaè.	I am the Alpha and the Omega, the First and the Last, the Beginning and the End.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	22	14	Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a suè'si wap bcáè'. A be maè'shi tá woweèe a niñ aè rla' ca, ye mbaèñ ce ce yi ke fa ryoèñ.	Blessed are those who do his commandments, that they may have the right to the tree of life, and may enter in by the gates into the city.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	22	15	Beèe ce a ce geèe ñgeèe ñgwe, ba ñgaâa tú', ba beèe ce a ce saèki, ba beèe ce a ce yúshi beèe, ba beèe ce a ce gú'shi neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, ba beèe ce a ce nya' mnde' a ce yu' rboèñ aè mnde' ce a ce nya' anaè, aède' ñwáè moè' efa beèe ca niñ aè rla' anaè ka'.	Outside are the dogs, the sorcerers, the sexually immoral, the murderers, the idolaters, and everyone who loves and practices falsehood.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	22	16	Ñwáè ce e tuusi yi ncïìndap ená e suñ weèe buu ca a tuusi máâ Jisoès, tá bcor vi bo rïìñ vi foñ. M yu ñwáè embe ndúè' Dávïìd, a ker ba mbeèr.	I, Jesus, have sent my angel to testify these things to you for the assemblies. I am the root and the offspring of David; the Bright and Morning Star."
Sataèn aè niñ njep Judaès ce a m ce too ená IÌskarïìyoèt, ce e m ba moè' efa beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	Satan entered into Judas, who was surnamed Iscariot, who was numbered with the twelve.
Baná m ce suñ wáè máná ku' njáèá rkoèñnïì ce e duèñshi neè máè na li ce duèñshi ená a foèosi ye efa ku' buu bbebep ce e m geèe. Ñwáè ce a foèosi yïì buu bbebep múcaèr ce duèñshi rkoèñnïì múcaèr.”	"Therefore I tell you, her sins, which are many, are forgiven, for she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little."""
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè natïì mbekïì, a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè túr yuu aè rbeèesi kuu buu ce beèe ca a laèa a kuu wáè na ka' a?”	"The high priest stood up, and said to him, ""Have you no answer? What is this that these testify against you?"""
Waè' Nyúè aè fa beèe wááwá bfee aè rgeèe tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se a? Waè' beèe wááwá a ke laèa bli ce a be yá'ni ka' a? Waè' beèe wááwá a rïìñ aè rsuñ beèe buu ce beèe mo' a laèa aè bli ce a m be yá'ni ka' a?	Do all have gifts of healings? Do all speak with various languages? Do all interpret?
Beèe ca a beèe ce a vúè neè ñgaèpni aè múè beèe, a túr ba mntee beèe enjep ñgoèñ. Yú' Rara yi yu njep waâp mntee ka'.	These are they who cause divisions, and are sensual, not having the Spirit.
E m tapse beèe anaè wa'a njobeè' e m ba ñwáâ mboèñmboñ, a ruusi neè Yú' Rara, a byemi seê. Ku' beèe magoèr a m byemi neè Tataê.	For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith, and many people were added to the Lord.
Máè ka' keè' a yá nyaèabaèraè', ncoèo efa gho aè ba jïìpri. A m ce too rlii ñwáè ce e m cu mbo ená Rkwe. Ñwáè ce a m ce too ená Mbaè Yir aè ce vúè mbe yeâ njïì. A m fa woweèe ñger mbenduè ñgúè' moè'sir efa bdïì' kyeèe efa beèe enjep ñgoèñ na, ená a yúshi woweèe neè kaèafaè', gee tá woweèe a kwe njeè, kwe byañ, vúè neè mnyaèa efa rïìñ a waâp mú.	And behold, a pale horse, and he who sat on it, his name was Death. Hades followed with him. Authority over one fourth of the earth, to kill with the sword, with famine, with death, and by the wild animals of the earth was given to him.
E ka' baè', a yá ñwáè mo' ce li rlii li m ba ená AÈniyaès. Yïì ñgúè' nyor moè' aè m kwe, e noñ njep keèñ yañ aè bfeè' waami.	There he found a certain man named Aeneas, who had been bedridden for eight years, because he was paralyzed.
Nyúè aè m ce máè ená m fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ anaè. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e m túr ntee boèñboñ neè máè, e m loèr yi ñger a fa' njep máâ ntee, a fa máè rfaè' ca ená m geêe.	of which I was made a servant, according to the gift of that grace of God which was given me according to the working of his power.
E boo ndap ŋgòr.	He has built a big house.
E m laèa wa'a, a ku riñ ñwáè ce e be loè fyeèni ye. A mbuèu ce e m laèa enáê, “Ku ba weèe wááwá ce weèe ce raa ka'.”	"For he knew him who would betray him, therefore he said, ""You are not all clean."""
Baná weèe tapsi mkoo ce mi sáè naè, ke' ma'shi tá mkoo mi ce kaèñ weèe ka'	Therefore, lift up the hands that hang down and the feeble knees,
Ku' beèe a m táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ. Nlaèa ñwáè yi tarteè a yi moè' ka'.	For many gave false testimony against him, and their testimony didn't agree with each other.
njobeè' ñger Yú' ce yi vúè neè ryoèñ njo' Jisos Kraâis yi geèe máè luñ efa ñger buu bbebep ba rkwe.	For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus made me free from the law of sin and of death.
Jisoès aè ka' yá ená ñwáè anaè aè beèesi neè bfee-ñwá, a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè yu njïìsaèp efa kúú Nyúè ka'.” Ká' embo naè ñwáè aè ker túr cuèu aè rbipshi yuu neè ye ka'.	"When Jesus saw that he answered wisely, he said to him, ""You are not far from the Kingdom of God."" No one dared ask him any question after that."
M rïìñ máná weèe yu ñgúè Abraèhaêm. Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe ce roèo aè ryú máè, njobeè' yuu máè suñ weèe yi niñ weèe mbaè tuè' ka'.	I know that you are Abraham's seed, yet you seek to kill me, because my word finds no place in you.
Fùp à koo bèe sê.	There is too much poverty.
Nyúè aè m fa ye tá e bo ba aèmboè mbú tañshïì wa'a, tá li rkwe li bo geèe tá Nyúè foosi beèe ce a byemi neè ye. Nyúè aè m geèe wa'a, tá e bo duèñshi neè beèe ená e yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, njobeè' aè m ba entombïì, e kur ntee a fuse efa buu bbebep ce beèe a m ce geèe.	whom God set forth to be an atoning sacrifice, through faith in his blood, for a demonstration of his righteousness through the passing over of prior sins, in God's forbearance;
Yuu ce beèe a ce kwaè'shi ená yi yu blúr aè ñgúè' yïì Nyúè naè, bfee vi yu njo a caa bfee ce beèe a túr, yuu ce a kwaè'shi ená a bgoè'sïì aè ñgúè' yïì Nyúè naè, ñger yi yu njo a caa ñger ce beèe a túr.	Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weakness of God is stronger than men.
Boo, yu'ni neè neè weêe bta ba weêe mmaê. Yi yu yáánïì ená beèe ce a yu aèbee a Tata Jisoès weèe a gee wa'a.	Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
njobeè' Hároèd aè m ce wáp Joân. E m yi ená Joân yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, a ker ba ñwáâ nrara, a ce tá'shi ye. Joân aè m ce laèa yuu, yi ce fa Hároèd ñgá' seê, geewa'a, e ku ce koèñ aè ryu' yuu ce e m ce laèa.	for Herod feared John, knowing that he was a righteous and holy man, and kept him safe. When he heard him, he did many things, and he heard him gladly.
Tata Nyúè beesi wee mntee tá weèe riñ njáèá rkoèñnïì ce e túr neè weèe, keèr rïìñ njáèá ñkur ntee ce Jisos Kraâis túr.	May the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of Christ.
Ka' ba ená rsa' rrúèú ce li m ce geèe beèe a gwe mnsa' Nyúè naè li m ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè, baná rsa' rfi ce li ce geèe beèe a ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè li caèa lïû rrúèú aè njáèá njïì ce e ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè.	For if the service of condemnation has glory, the service of righteousness exceeds much more in glory.
A m duè neè máè mbe kor aè nfeè' entoèmbïì, beèe wááwá a cañ a ma' máè, ñwáè ce e táá yaè njïìnsa' aè ke' ba ka'. M ce loo máná Nyúè fa baèa woweèe njobeè' woweèe a m geèe neè máè wa' ka'.	At my first defense, no one came to help me, but all left me. May it not be held against them.
njobeè' weèr aè yu' ená weèe aè láè ntee neè Jisos Kraêis, a ker koñ beèe Nyúè wááwá.	having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and of the love which you have toward all the saints,
A m fa njeñwáè anaè bbaèp vi bbaa. Bbaèp anaè vi m feese bbaèp waèawa mñkuèr. A m fa ye bbaèp ca tá e bo fáñ aègho cañ du aè dïì' ce a m kupshi neè ye aè ntee rïìñ naè, faè dïì' nyo ca bo koo ye ka'. E fáñ baè' aèfo, tá a bo keè'ni ye aè bfeâ' btaar ba nto'.	Two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, that she might fly into the wilderness to her place, so that she might be nourished for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
Jisoès weèe a m fúú embe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ka' kuè fúú wa'a, e lor Jáms ba Joân a woweèe a du mbe ndaèp mbe Saimúèn ba Andruè.	Immediately, when they had come out of the synagogue, they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
Boo woo a rìŋ buu sê.	Your children are very intelligent.
Njɛ̀ɛ ŋgèe anà zhi bòŋ kaʼ.	That kind of behaviour is not good.
Ka' dïû' rlúèshïì anaè yi m ba aègho wáá wa'a, Nyúè aè ku ker laa enáê, “AÈde' woweèe a ba' mbe ya dïû' rlúèshïì tá a bo lúèshi ka'.”	"and in this place again, ""They will not enter into my rest."""
E be naèa tu ená e caèa buu wááwá ce beèe a ce gú'shi aègho ená a Nyúè. E geèe wa'a, du niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, cu mbo, lor yi tu ená a ye Nyúè.	he who opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or that is worshiped; so that he sits as God in the temple of God, setting himself up as God.
Beèe ce a woweèe a m ce duè, a m táá, a túr yuu laèa ka'. Woweèe a m yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ce laèa, a ke' ce yá ñwáè ka'.	The men who traveled with him stood speechless, hearing the sound, but seeing no one.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Lo rlii a nda?” E beesïì enáê, “La rlii a Mncúèkïì.” E m laèa wa'a njobeè' byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m niñ njep ye aèñgoo.	"Jesus asked him, ""What is your name?"" He said, ""Legion,"" for many demons had entered into him."
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Ñwáè e ke cu nteèe ba njo' bráâd caè'caè' ka'.’ ”	"Jesus answered him, saying, ""It is written, 'Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God.'"""
Nyúè ce ko'si rshentee neè beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep neè ye, a ker ce geèe neè bee moè' foñ naè. Yaèp buu bbebep anaè ce jepsi beèe efa rrïìñ yuu mini.	For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in unrighteousness,
Waràgho anà yu ntùr.	That guava is unripe.
Beèe wááwá ce weèr woweèe yu aèfa a caè'ni wáè. Caè'ni beèe wááwá ce seèe woweèe aè byemi neè Jisos Kraêis, woweèe a koèñ weèr naè. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr weèe wááwá aè ntee boèñboñ.	All who are with me greet you. Greet those who love us in faith. Grace be with you all. Amen.
Mɛ̀ yɛ̀ɛsi ye, e ta bôr bòŋboŋ.	I have encouraged him and he has played football better.
Mɛ̀ m̀ bee dû.	I have ever gone.
Mbèŋ à jʉ̀p wèr.	The rain has beaten us severely.
E ke lò ce gèe ŋgèe àmbò lʉr waʼa.	He sometimes behaves like a fool.
Jus a beesïì neè ye enáê, “To yi yu yáánïì aèmboè weèr ce laèa ená aè yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè, yú' nyúèrkaè' yi ba njep wáè.”	"Then the Jews answered him, ""Don't we say well that you are a Samaritan, and have a demon?"""
Yi ce kúti yá aèmboè a yár ndap, a kupshi e ce raa.	When he returns, he finds it swept and put in order.
Beèe mo' efa múè beèe ce a m túr ba bfee ÁÈpáèkuraèn, ba beèe mo' ce a m túr ba bfee Stoyïìk, a m sár mnsár a Poêl. Beèe mo' efa waâp mú a laa yap enáê, “Ñwáè bu' cuèu ca ce roèo aè rlaèa ba ká?” Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “Yi ce yááti ená e ce laèa ba aèmboè mnyúè mo' ce seèe rïìñ ka'.” Woweèe a m laèa wa'a njobeè' Pol aè m ce feè'shi aèmboè Jisoès ba nfúú efa rkwe.	"Some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers also were conversing with him. Some said, ""What does this babbler want to say?"" Others said, ""He seems to be advocating foreign deities,"" because he preached Jesus and the resurrection."
Bfúr waê, máè loo weèe aè rlii yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis, ená weèe ba cuâu mo'sir. Weèe fa túr ñgaèpni a weâe mú ka'. Weèe ba aèbee aè yuu weèe ce kwaè'shi ker ba aè yuu weèe ce geèe.	Now I beg you, brothers, through the name of our Lord, Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfected together in the same mind and in the same judgment.
Yi ba ba foñ ená weèr aè nya' mnde' a kuu Nyúè, njobeè' weèr aè suñ beèe ená Nyúè aè m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe.	Yes, we are found false witnesses of God, because we testified about God that he raised up Christ, whom he didn't raise up, if it is so that the dead are not raised.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, máâ suñ weèe máná buu wááwá ce weèe ka' bipshi neè Nyúè aè rloo, byemi weená weèe aè koni, baná Nyúè be fa neè weèe.	Therefore I tell you, all things whatever you pray and ask for, believe that you have received them, and you shall have them.
M ̀ be kù kèʼ ye haar tɛ e kee vʉ̀.	I will just wait for him until he comes.
Yaŋ zhi koo ye.	He has been attacked by an illness.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Yoè Ta yuê?” Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe rïìñ máè ka', a riñ yaè Ta foñ ka'. Weèe aè ba riñ máè, weèe aè ba rïìñ yaè Ta foñ.”	"They said therefore to him, ""Where is your Father?"" Jesus answered, ""You know neither me, nor my Father. If you knew me, you would know my Father also."""
AÈ ba ba yi aèmboè máè, beèe wááwá aè ba kuè cu ñkúè aèmboè máè. Ka' m ce laèa wa'a, máè rïìñ máná Nyúè aè fa beèe ñger jáá jáèá jáá. E fa ñwáè mo' ñger ená e fa' neè ye aè njïì moè', a ker fa moè' ñger ená e fa' neè ye aè njïì moè'.	Yet I wish that all men were like me. However each man has his own gift from God, one of this kind, and another of that kind.
Pol aè beesïì enáê, “M táá seè'ni ba mbe kor ñkwe Ruêm, aè ba mbe dïì' ce a be sa' wa mnsa'. Máè geèe faèa moè' neè Jus ka', wá wáè foñ rïìñ wa'a.	"But Paul said, ""I am standing before Caesar's judgment seat, where I ought to be tried. I have done no wrong to the Jews, as you also know very well."
Yaa ŋwàʼ embe na zhi yû?	Where is my book I kept here?
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè ñkúú Hároèd aè koo ñgaâa cor mo' a ce fa woweèe ñgá'.	Now about that time, King Herod stretched out his hands to oppress some of the assembly.
Seèe rïìñ seená mncir yu ba yuu ce aè yú', máè ba ya ba ñwáè ce a fyeèni aèmboè ñkwaèa wa'a neè buu bbebep.	For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am fleshly, sold under sin.
Zhìsèe mâ e ke cu ba fɛ?	Where does our mother live?
Boo nfúroè ce a ce naè, a caè'ni wáè.	The children of your chosen sister greet you. Amen.
Muu ca kòŋ à rsɛʼ kwâa àmbò ndùu waʼa.	This child likes to chew corn like a giant rat.
Pol aè niñ mbe ndaèp rloo anaè aèmboè e m geèe aè mla' mo' naè. E m loèr mmbomntaa mi mtaar aè rnaèshi woweèe buu embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè,	Paul, as was his custom, went in to them, and for three Sabbath days reasoned with them from the Scriptures,
Mncir ce Nyúè aè m fa neè Jus vi m táá ba aètu buu bboèñboñ ce vi bii ka' ba. AÈde' vi duñshïì seèe buu bboèñboñ anaè seese ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, btañshïì ce ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a ke tañshi njep feè' njep feè' vi túr ñger aè rgeèe beèe ce a ce vúè aègho naè tá a ba yáánïì ka'.	For the law, having a shadow of the good to come, not the very image of the things, can never with the same sacrifices year by year, which they offer continually, make perfect those who draw near.
Saimúèn aè beesïì enáê, “M kwaè'shi máná yu ñwáè ce rkaa li li m ba goèr naè.” Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Wáè beèesi yáánïì.”	"Simon answered, ""He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most."" He said to him, ""You have judged correctly."""
Woweèe a ka' yu' aèmboè rfúú ce beèe a be keè fúú efa rkwe, beèe mo' efa waâp mú a vúshïì ye, beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “Weèr be keèr yu' yuu ce aè be laèa kuu yuu ca nyúè moè'.”	"Now when they heard of the resurrection of the dead, some mocked; but others said, ""We want to hear you again concerning this."""
Weèr aè m yá bfúr mo' aèfo, woweèe a laa ená weèr woweèe cu aèfo aè mnoèñ saèambaê. Awá weèr aè du a ba' aè rla' Ruêm.	where we found brothers, and were entreated to stay with them for seven days. So we came to Rome.
Woweèe a ka' duè baè' aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, fa ñwaè' neè govanoè wáá, a fa Pol neè ye foñ.	When they came to Caesarea and delivered the letter to the governor, they also presented Paul to him.
Loè neè mbekïì tá seèe duê. Ñwáè ce e fyeèni máè naè yu aètútú.”	"Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me is at hand."""
Ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe anaè aè beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, máè ba vú neè muu waè aè ryá wáè. Yú' bebep yi yu njep ye, a geêe, e ke' ce laèa ka'.	"One of the multitude answered, ""Teacher, I brought to you my son, who has a mute spirit;"
Nyʉ̀ be kèe coʼshi běe bbòŋboŋ efa mʉ̀ běe bbebep.	God will select the good people out of the bad people.
E m ba ba njep ñgoèñ na e m ba ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì ka' njobeè' ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a yu njep ñgoèñ na wáá, a ce tañshi tañshïì aèmboè ncir Musïìs yi laèa.	For if he were on earth, he would not be a priest at all, seeing there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law;
Pol ba Baènabaès a ker laa neè ñger-ñwáè enáê, “Yi m ba yáánïì ená weèr fe'shi blaâa Nyúè neè weèe entombïì. AÈmboè weèe aè kani a lor ená weèe aè ghááte aè rkoni ryoèñ ce nfeseè ka' na, baná weèr be maè'shi weèe, feè'shi ba neè beèe enje jáá.	"Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly, and said, ""It was necessary that God's word should be spoken to you first. Since indeed you thrust it from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, behold, we turn to the Gentiles."
Woweèe a m loo, a laa enáê, “Tataê, wáè ce wáè rïìñ mntee beèe wááwá. Duèñshi laè weèr ñwáè ce wáè ce efa múè beèe a mmbaa ca,	"They prayed, and said, ""You, Lord, who know the hearts of all men, show which one of these two you have chosen"
Woweèe a ka' yá aèmboè e ce jáèr mbenduè rdip, a ce kwa'shi ená a nyir, a warse,	but they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed that it was a ghost, and cried out;
Muu nsuènsuè moè' ce a m ce too ená Yutikoès aè m cu mbe wenduè. Pol aè ka' feè'shi duèni goèr, e buumïì, a ka' buumi boèñboñ seê, a gwe embe ndaèp ce e m ba mbenduè yïû mbekïì. A ka' naèa ye mbekïì e banïì kwe.	A certain young man named Eutychus sat in the window, weighed down with deep sleep. As Paul spoke still longer, being weighed down by his sleep, he fell down from the third story, and was taken up dead.
A ke laa nyàa nè mkinyàa e bi cɛr sê.	When we cook meat with limestone it gets ready very fast.
Rrɛ̀ʼ ca rli kùʼ sê.	This yam is very big.
Geèe neè tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se, gee tá beèe ce a kweñger a kúti bteèe, gee tá ñgaâa byañ msaèasïì a ke'se, raa, fúr neè byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe. Weèe aè m laè' a ka' koni ka', weâe geèe neè beèe wa'a, weèe fa koo blaè' ka'.	Heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, and cast out demons. Freely you received, so freely give.
Joân aè m kani efa rbeèesi yuu ce woweèe a m bipshi na ka'. Cena a yuu ce e m laèa neè woweèe aè bsii beèe wááwá. E m laèa enáê, “A máè Kraâis anaè ka'”	"He declared, and didn't deny, but he declared, ""I am not the Christ."""
Ñwáè rfaè' ce e ka' tá rïìñ yuu ce yïì masaè ce koèñ ka', ka' gee yuu mo' ce a ba lïìp ye aètu mo, baná a be lïìp ye neè mñgwaèa múcaèr. Ñwáè ce a ka' fa ye buu goèr, a be keè' ená ye ye fa goèr. Ñwáè ce a ka' lá buu mbe yeâ mmboè goèr, baná a be keè keè' ená e fa buu goèr foñ.	but he who didn't know, and did things worthy of stripes, will be beaten with few stripes. To whoever much is given, of him will much be required; and to whom much was entrusted, of him more will be asked.
E fúr seèe efa túè'njïì, a lor seèe a lá ba aè dïì' ce muu yïì ce e koèñ se naè ce sa' aèmboè ñkúú.	who delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of the Son of his love;
Taase neè buu wááwá ce beèe a ce laèa neè weèe, koo vïû bboèñboñ,	Test all things, and hold firmly that which is good.
Woweèe a m ce cu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, a ce geèe buu wááwá ce Tata Nyúè aè m laèa, a bár mo' ka'.	They were both righteous before God, walking blamelessly in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord.
Mɛ̀ kupse ndap.	I have moved house.
Àtà m du mbe Ŋkàmbɛ̀ʼ ntìni.	I may go to Nkambe today.
E ba lor misò mkuu a fyenî.	He took our beans and sold.
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir moè' aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, wáè laèa buu ca wa'a a ce cáp weèr foñ.”	"One of the lawyers answered him, ""Teacher, in saying this you insult us also."""
Bfúr vi a ka' duèse ñkaè' anaè wáá, e lo a du a waâp mbuèu. E m duè aèwañ ka', e m duè ba aè bsúèti.	But when his brothers had gone up to the feast, then he also went up, not publicly, but as it were in secret.
Saèkaèriyaè aè ka' fúú embo, a moo aè rlaèa neè woweèe laèr, a ká' a ce suñ buu neè woweèe ba neè mmbo. Woweèe a ka' yá wa' a ku riñ ená e yá njáèá rlo mo'.	When he came out, he could not speak to them, and they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple. He continued making signs to them, and remained mute.
Woweèe a be duè aè ñgoèñ wááwá, sïìr dïì' ce beèe Nyúè a yu, ce yu rla' ce Nyúè koèñ se naè, kaari tarte. Woweèe a be sïìr wa'a, tá mor yi suu embe buèu toèo woweèe.	They went up over the breadth of the earth, and surrounded the camp of the saints, and the beloved city. Fire came down out of heaven from God, and devoured them.
A njáèá njïì ce bbyeèñge brara eluâuñgoèñ ce a m láè map mmir mbenduè Nyúè, a m ce duèñshi lap rboèñ. Woweèe a m ce yu'ni neè bduu wap.	For this is how the holy women before, who hoped in God also adorned themselves, being in subjection to their own husbands:
Geewa'a, ñwáè aè ka' beesi yi ntee byemi neè Tata Jisoès baná Nyúè be caè'si yuu ce yi cete ye bfee anaè.	But whenever one turns to the Lord, the veil is taken away.
Pol aè ka' vúè, Jus ce a m vúâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm naè a vú a tááte, a sir ye a fa mbetar, a suñ ku' buu ce e m geèe. Geewa'a yuu mo' yi m ba ce yi m ce duèñshi ená buu anaè aè m ba mini ka'.	When he had come, the Jews who had come down from Jerusalem stood around him, bringing against him many and grievous charges which they could not prove,
Btar boo, weèe fa geèe ñgeèe aè njáèá njïì ce ntee yi lo yañ boo wee tá bsáè vi lo koo woweèe ka'.	Fathers, don't provoke your children, so that they won't be discouraged.
Woweèe a ka' maè', nca yi niñ njo ku' goèr seê, mraa mi ká' a ce ceeñger.	When they had done this, they caught a great multitude of fish, and their net was breaking.
Weèe aè ka' riñ buu ce máè suñ weèe na, ce geèe vi, baná weèe be koni bghoènïì.	If you know these things, blessed are you if you do them.
Nyúè a ñwáè ce e geèe weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè ka' ba aèbee. E m geèe ená Jisos Kraâis fa seèe bfee bboèñboñ. E ce yá seèe aèmboè beèe ce a cu rcu yáánïì, a ba brara ba njïì enjep Jisos Kraêis. Ku ba njïì enjep Jisoès ce e tee seèe efa ñgá' buu bbebep.	But of him, you are in Christ Jesus, who was made to us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification, and redemption:
E làa enɛ à vʉ.	He has said that you should come.
Bfúr waê, ñwáè aè ka' laa ená e byemi neè Nyúè, ke' ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ ka', baná sá' efa gho yu ká? AÈde' rbyemïì anaè li gee ye e luñ a?	What good is it, my brothers, if a man says he has faith, but has no works? Can faith save him?
Máè m yá yap ñgaâa maè' bïìr ce a ke maè' bïìr yaèp cu ba mbe mnyaèabaèraè'. A m suñ máè ená woweèe a yu malaèr mjeâe mmbaa.	The number of the armies of the horsemen was two hundred million. I heard the number of them.
Mú nfeè' aè ka' tuuse, Jisoès aè jár aè mla' mñgoèrñgoèr ba aè mla' mñká'ñká', a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè. Yïì beèe ce ncoèp baa-aè-rrúèú a m duè a ye.	It happened soon afterwards, that he went about through cities and villages, preaching and bringing the good news of the Kingdom of God. With him were the twelve,
Má ke yoèñshi Nyúè a weâe btu aè nfeè' wááwá njobeè' e ghoèni weèe embenjïì Jisos Kraêis.	I always thank my God concerning you, for the grace of God which was given you in Christ Jesus;
Blaèa ce enáê, “Nfeè' moè'sir caè'caè'”, vi ce duèñshi ená Nyúè be caè'si buu ce aède' vi ci'tïì, ce yu buu ce e m geèe naè, tá buu ce aède' vi ci'tïì ka' vi cu nfeseè.	"This phrase, ""Yet once more,"" signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that have been made, that those things which are not shaken may remain."
Zhi bòŋ à rtʉr bòŋàbee fa wěe mʉʉ.	It is good to have unity among yourselves.
“Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu beâe aè rla' Koèrasïìn, ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu beâe aè rla' Báèrsaidaè njobeè' a m ba gee buu bghagha' ce a m geèe fa weâe mú naè ba aè rla' Tayaè, ker ba aè rla' Sidoèn beâe aèfo a m ba neè kupse e sese', a ma' bcáè' njïì rkwe, a yo' bú aè nyoèr, a cute aègho.	"Woe to you, Chorazin! Woe to you, Bethsaida! For if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
Luke	Luêk	10	14	Geewa'a, be keè ba aè noèñ mnsa' tá ñgá' beâe aè rla' Tayaè ba aè rlaè' Sidoèn ba aèndeèe neè yeè.	But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment than for you.
Luke	Luêk	10	15	AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe ce weèe yu beâe aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, waè' a be ko'si weèe mbe buèu a? Yi yu wa' ka'. A be duè neè weèe ba mbaè yir.	You, Capernaum, who are exalted to heaven, will be brought down to Hades.
Luke	Luêk	10	16	Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' yuu ce weèe ce laèa baná ñwáè anaè aè yu' ya nlaèa. Ñwáè ce e ka' kani baná ñgaèñ aè kani ya nlaèa. Ñwáè ce e ka' kani ya nlaèa baná ñgaèñ aè kani nlaèa ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.”	Whoever listens to you listens to me, and whoever rejects you rejects me. Whoever rejects me rejects him who sent me."
Wáè byemi ená m yu njep yaè Taê, yaè Ta aè ba njep máè a? Blaèa ce m ce laèa neè weèe na, m ce laèa ba aè ñger ya ka'. Yaè Ta ce e yu njep máè a ñwáè ce e ce geèe li rfaè'.	Don't you believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The words that I tell you, I speak not from myself; but the Father who lives in me does his works.
Nduunjì anà zhi goni a sap sê.	That road is extremely long.
E m ce laèa neè beèe enáê, “Nfeè' aè gháá, kúú Nyúè yi yu aètútú seè'ni, kupse neè, ma' yeè buu bbebep, byemi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ.”	"and saying, ""The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand! Repent, and believe in the Good News."""
Wèr à koo mbàa ese ye.	We have taken money from him.
Wèr à cʉʉshi yer mbʉ, wèe à maʼshì yee zhi zhe kwâa.	We tethered our goats but you allowed yours and they ate the corn.
Yap zhi ce no mndip.	Our cows are grazing.
Beèe wááwá a m ce warse a ce koosimnse. E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Fa war neè ka'. Muu ca aè kwe kwe ka', e ce buumi buumi.”	"All were weeping and mourning her, but he said, ""Don't weep. She isn't dead, but sleeping."""
Nfeè' anaè aè ka' gháá baná beèe ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a cañ duse aè mtuèu, tá beèe ce a yu aè múè la' a fúú, tá beèe ce a yu aè mñkúè a ker kúti aè laè' ka',	Then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains. Let those who are in the midst of her depart. Let those who are in the country not enter therein.
Weèe ce weèe yu boo bfïî, aède' weèe ce weèe yu beâe bbebep, laa yuu boèñboñ aè njáâá ká? Yi yu wa' njobeè' ñwáè e ke laèa ba efa ku' buu ce vi ruu njep yeâ ntee.	You offspring of vipers, how can you, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks.
Woweèe wááwá a m ye byee ce Nyúè aè m maè'ri embe buèu,	and all ate the same spiritual food;
Mɛ̀ cuusi muu à nshe e ku kɛʼ a ce ŋàp.	I have placed the child on the ground and it has started crawling.
Be kèe ba haʼŋgàani tɛ m̀ du yɛ ye.	Next year I shall go and see him.
Wèr à koʼ baa mermgiʼ.	We climbed the hill ourselves.
Rlisèe li yû?	They have taken the flute along.
E ker laa foñ enáê, “Mbe dïì' ce a m laèa neè woweèe ená, ‘weèe yu yaè bee ka'’, ku ba mbe dïì' anaè ce a be too woweèe ená boo Nyúè ce e yu nteèe.”	It will be that in the place where it was said to them, 'You are not my people,' There they will be called 'children of the living God.'
Duè neè! M ce tuu weèe tá weèe du ba aèmboè njeèe aè múè bkuura.	Go your ways. Behold, I send you out as lambs among wolves.
Ñwáè moè' aè m laèa yuu mo' aèwañ a kuu ye ka' njobeè' a m ce wáp Juês.	Yet no one spoke openly of him for fear of the Jews.
M be fa wáè bki embe dïû' kúú Nyúè embe buèu. Yuu ce wáè ka' kur njep ñgoèñ na, baná a be kur yi mbe buèu. Yuu ce wáè ka' fyááshi njep ñgoèñ na baná a be fyáèáshi yi mbe buèu.”	"I will give to you the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and whatever you bind on earth will have been bound in heaven; and whatever you release on earth will have been released in heaven."""
Bee lii àfo sê.	So people have gathered there.
Yaè Ta ka' gee wa'a, baná yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ce laèa aèmboè buu ca yi ghááteè njo aè njáâá ká?”	"How then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that it must be so?"""
Jisoès aè m koèñ Maataè ba nfúr yïì ker ba Lasoèroès.	Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.
njobeè' beèe ce a be bo'shi ená a woweèe Kraêis, káè ená a woweèe ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè áè, a be keè nyáá, duèñshi mncoèo keèr geèe buu bghagha' ená a bo bo' ka' neè beèe ce Nyúè aè m ce naè-ñwáè.	For there will arise false christs and false prophets, and will show signs and wonders, that they may lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.
Beèe mo' a m ce laa yap ená a AÈlajaè; beèe mo' ená a ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce e yu aèmboè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce entoèmbïì naè.	"But others said, ""He is Elijah."" Others said, ""He is a prophet, or like one of the prophets."""
Njeñwáè moè' aè m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè a ce too ená Anaè. E m ba muu Fánuèwáèr embe ndúè' Ashaè. E m ba nleeñwáè seê. E m duè bguèu, a nduu a ku cu ba aè bfeè' saèamba caè'caè', nduu aè kwe.	There was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (she was of a great age, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,
Ñwáè ce e ka' bipshi wa'a, baná ñgaèñ yu lúr. Mboè wáè rïìñ ená a ke byeè ñgúè yuu njep nsheè e búteè wáá ka' fúú a?	You foolish one, that which you yourself sow is not made alive unless it dies.
Joân aè m banïì laa neè Hároèd enáê, “Ncir yi byemi ená aè fap ñgwa nfúroè beesïì aè yoè ka'.”	"For John said to Herod, ""It is not lawful for you to have your brother's wife."""
Seèe ku'si Nyúè ce e túr ñger aè rkeè'ni seèe faè dïì' seèe gwe ka'. E be loèr weèe tá weèe táá kuèntombïì neè ye mbe nfeè' ce e duèñshi yi ñger a ce sa' beèe naè, tá weèe táá wa'a, túr faèa ka', ce lu'shi.	Now to him who is able to keep them from stumbling, and to present you faultless before the presence of his glory in great joy,
Nyúè aè m yuu weèe aè ntaa nluèuluu. Baná weèe lor weêe mnyor gee rfaè' aègho ba neè ye caè'caè' tá e bo sa' foèo aègho.	for you were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body and in your spirit, which are God's.
mluè ce aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na, ba broñ buu, ba ntee ce beèe a ke túr aè buu moè', vi kur blaèa anaè, yi ke' gee ñgúè ka'.	and the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the lusts of other things entering in choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
Bdïì' wááwá ce e m duè, káè aè mlaè' mká'ñká' ba aè mla' mñgoèrñgoèr áè, beèe a vúè neè ñgaâa byañ aè ntaa, ce bu' mmbo neè ye ená e ku ma'shi tá a joo ka' yi cuèu cáè'. Ñgaâa byañ wááwá ce a m joèo ye a m ke'seè.	Wherever he entered, into villages, or into cities, or into the country, they laid the sick in the marketplaces, and begged him that they might touch just the fringe of his garment; and as many as touched him were made well.
Mmasaè, geèe neè ñgeâe boèñboñ neè wee bkwaèa. Kuushi neè ená wee weèe túr masaè ce e yu mbe buèu.	Masters, give to your servants that which is just and equal, knowing that you also have a Master in heaven.
aè ba beèe ce a tami nyor aè rkwe aètu yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis.	men who have risked their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Seèe aè m ce vúè njep ñgoèñ na, a túr yuu mo' ka'. Seèe be keè ce duè tá seèe lor yuu mo' enjo ka'.	For we brought nothing into the world, and we certainly can't carry anything out.
Woweèe a suñ beèe anaè yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa, beèe anaè a ma'shïì, woweèe a du aègho.	They said to them just as Jesus had said, and they let them go.
Tuè' yi ka' laa enáê, “M yu ñgúè' moè' efa nyor ka', njobeè' m yu rlir ka',” waè' aède' blaèa anaè vi gee tuè' yi buu efa rba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor a?	"If the ear would say, ""Because I'm not the eye, I'm not part of the body,"" it's not therefore not part of the body."
tá a káâ' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm feè'shi neè bto' wááwá aè li rlii ená beèe a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep tá Nyúè bo foèosi woweèe.	and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations, beginning at Jerusalem.
Mɛ̀ tʉr bkoonyʉ btaar.	I have three bee hives.
Rbyemïì li m geèe Nowa aè yu' yuu ce Nyúè aè m suñ ye ená yi be keè koni. Ka' e m be yá buu anaè neè mmir ka' wa'a, e m ku yu'ni neè Nyúè, a gee ma njáèá keñ moè', a beèe embe yeâ ndaèp wááwá a lo a niñ mbo a luñ efa mdip ce mi m cete ñgoèñ wááwá naè. E m geèe wa'a yi duñshïì ená ñgeèe beèe enjep ñgoèñ na yi m ba bebep. Nyúè aè m loèr yi ye aèmboè ñwáâ nyáánïì, aèmboè e ke loèr ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' byemi neè ye.	By faith, Noah, being warned about things not yet seen, moved with godly fear, prepared a ship for the saving of his house, through which he condemned the world, and became heir of the righteousness which is according to faith.
Mɛ̀ làa nè yaa cùu.	I said it myself.
Beèe ce a m kaari aèfo aè ryá, a ka' yá yuu ce yi m koni, a la' mmbo mbe waâp mntee a duse.	All the multitudes that came together to see this, when they saw the things that were done, returned home beating their breasts.
E cu njepmbè bfěʼ btaar.	She has been out of the village for three years.
E be vúè tá e gee tá ñgoèñ yi yá yaèp faèa kuèu buu bbebep, ba buu byáánïì ker ba mnsa'.	When he has come, he will convict the world about sin, about righteousness, and about judgment;
Yòo ŋgwe cà yû?	Where is that your dog?
Buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè m gee vi yu yáánïì, mo' efa gho aè ke' ba yïì ce ñwáè kani ka'. Yi yu ená beèe aè ka' koni buu ca, a yoñshïì Nyúè.	For every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be rejected, if it is received with thanksgiving.
Yi ba ba ená Jisos Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe ka', yi ba ba ená blaèa ce weèr ce feè'shi neè weèe na vi yu aè cicïì, le rbyemïì li ba foñ aè cicïì.	If Christ has not been raised, then our preaching is in vain, and your faith also is in vain.
Jisoès aè ka' yu' wa'a, a laa neè ye enáê, “Yuu yi báti yi mo'sir ce wáè ba geèe. Fyeèni buu wááwá ce a túr, lor mbaèa efa gho, gapshi neè ñgaâa fuèp, tá aè bo túr bkuè' mbe buèu. Wáâ geèe wa' wáá, vú fa máâ mbuèu.”	"When Jesus heard these things, he said to him, ""You still lack one thing. Sell all that you have, and distribute it to the poor. You will have treasure in heaven. Come, follow me."""
Wáâ Nyúè ce wáè loèr yo ñger a ce faè' aègho njep weâr mntee goèr seê, Wáâ Nyúè ce wáè túr ñger aè rgeèe caa embe dïì' weèr aè bipshi káè embe dïì' weèr ce kwaè'shi áè,	Now to him who is able to do exceedingly abundantly above all that we ask or think, according to the power that works in us,
Baná weèe lor nfeè' neè ye ñgeèe. Weèe fa geèe ñgeèe aèmboè beèe ce a máñni buu ka', geèe neè ba aèmboè beèe ce a rïìñ buu.	Therefore watch carefully how you walk, not as unwise, but as wise;
Wɛ̀r à du njep Koncɛp a yɛ ŋwɛ̀ njoo kaʼ.	We went down to Konchep and saw nobody there.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Jisoès aè m vúè a duñshi yïì nyor neè yïì beèe naè, Tomaês, moè' efa múè beâe ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ce a m ce too ená rfar naè, aè m ba aèfo ka'.	But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, wasn't with them when Jesus came.
Geewa'a, a byeè e fúú, ku', ntii efa gho ba magoèr, ba seè'ni ba aè ce ce aède' bsiñ vi ba'rïì mndap mbo.”	"yet when it is sown, grows up, and becomes greater than all the herbs, and puts out great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under its shadow."""
Wèr yu àbee.	We are together.
Ŋwɛ̀ ce e ke bèter e ke ba ŋwɛ̀ mndeʼ.	A person who makes up excuses is always a liar.
Fa fa fáñ neè Sataèn ka'.	neither give place to the devil.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe a yu' yïì nsuñ aè bdïì' bsïìp aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	The report of him went out immediately everywhere into all the region of Galilee and its surrounding area.
Weèr aè m ce duè múwáèá-múwáèá, a lor mnoèñ aèñgoo, a yá ñgá' seê, a ka' ba' aètútú rla' Kidoèm. Fu' yi m maè'shi ená weèr ba' aè rla' anaè ka', weèr aè lá' a du aè mbeèp moâ' aègee to' Kreât ce fu' yi m ce caèa ka'. Rla' Saèlmoneè li ba yi nje yáá.	When we had sailed slowly many days, and had come with difficulty opposite Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under the lee of Crete, opposite Salmone.
njobeè' m ka' vú weèr beèe mo' e aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè, woweèe a vú yá ená weèe aè tami nyor ka', rïìtu yi koo weèr. Rïìtu yi ka' koo weèr, yi ba eká aèmboè weèe ce weèr aè láè ntee njep weèe.	so that I won't by any means, if there come with me any of Macedonia and find you unprepared, we (to say nothing of you) should be disappointed in this confident boasting.
Woowèe a be vʉ̀ seʼkɛ?	When will they come?
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' su'si nyor wáá, baná ñgaèñ be kuè suè'si ba mi mkuèu njobeè' yïì nyor ce raa. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe ce raa, geewa'a ku ba weèe wááwá ce weèe ce raa ka'.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Someone who has bathed only needs to have his feet washed, but is completely clean. You are clean, but not all of you."""
Kaèyinaèn aè ba muu Ánoès, Ánoès aè ba muu Sáêr, Sár aè ba muu Adaèm ce e m ba muu Nyúè.	the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.
Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, “Fa kur cuèu naè' ce e ce bu' msañ ka'.” Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ker laa foñ enáê, “Ñwáè rfaè' aè ghááte aè rkoo vi blaè'.”	"For the Scripture says, ""You shall not muzzle the ox when it treads out the grain."" And, ""The laborer is worthy of his wages."""
Jisoès aè m suèu a woweèe embe rtuèu a táá aè mbo'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m ba aèfo aè ku' ñgoo seê, beèe a vúâ aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ker ba aè bu' mla', aè mla' Tayaè ba Sidoèn ce mi m ba aèwaâa roè.	He came down with them, and stood on a level place, with a crowd of his disciples, and a great number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, who came to hear him and to be healed of their diseases;
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Máè m koèñ Jakoèp a baa Ásoè.” naè.	"Even as it is written, ""Jacob I loved, but Esau I hated."""
Máèári aè laa enáê, “Ya ntee yi ce náèsi Tata Nyúè.	"Mary said, ""My soul magnifies the Lord."
Ncɛ̀p à tose bèe à daʼsè enɛ wùu.	When the juju appeared they scattered in a mass.
Mnoèñ mo' vi be keè ba ce beèe ce a baèa weèe a be keè boo ñka' sïìr weèe aègho kaari tarte, gaèñ weèe fa mbetar,	For the days will come on you, when your enemies will throw up a barricade against you, surround you, hem you in on every side,
Ŋwɛ̀ ca a yàa tâ ce e m bi mɛ̀.	This person is my biological father.
E beesïì a laa enáê, “Yuu wááwá ce aè byeè ba yaè Ta embe buèu ka', a be keèe co'.	"But he answered, ""Every plant which my heavenly Father didn't plant will be uprooted."
Nfeè' aè ke' tuuse ka', e ker ká' a ce laèa, a ce yoèñshi Nyúè.	His mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue freed, and he spoke, blessing God.
Fa maè'shi neè tá ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka'. Weèe ka' ce kar weèe beèe ce a ce geèe ñgeâe bebep, weèe ku lo gee ñgeâe bebep foñ.	"Don't be deceived! ""Evil companionships corrupt good morals."""
tá ryá'nïì ca li bo geèe tá bbyeèñge ce a bii bghaèrbeèe naè a bo koèñ bduu wap ba boo wap,	that they may train the young women to love their husbands, to love their children,
E m waa neè njeèndoñ ntatap enáê, “Ma rla' Babiloèn li gweè. Li gweè dúèdúè. Rla' anaè aè kúti dïì' ce mnyúâmkaè' vi ce cu. Byú' bebep wááwá vi tarshi aèfo. Njáèá bsiñ ce beèe a koèñ ka' vi tarshi nyor aèfo.	"He cried with a mighty voice, saying, ""Fallen, fallen is Babylon the great, and she has become a habitation of demons, a prison of every unclean spirit, and a prison of every unclean and hateful bird!"
Nyúè aè m geèe buu wááwá njïì enjep ye, káè yu buu embe buèu áè, káè yu vïì enjep ñgoèñ áè, káè yu buu ce aède' beèe a yá áè, káè yu buu ce aède' beèe a yá ka' áè, buu ca wááwá yu aègho njo' Jisos Kraêis. Ka' byú' njáèá jáá jáèá jáá ce vi túr ñger áè, Nyúè aè m geèe buu ca wááwá neè muu yïì, njïì enjep muu yïì anaè.	For by him all things were created, in the heavens and on the earth, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers; all things have been created through him, and for him.
AÈ ka' ba njo' yïì mini ca weèr aè byemi ená weèe ce geèe buu ce weèr aè suñ weèe, kuè ce geèe ba vi aè nfeè' wááwá.	We have confidence in the Lord concerning you, that you both do and will do the things we command.
E ba ce yùpshi yuʼ a sɛɛ bo à sàʼ.	She was peeling the plantain and cut her hand with the knife.
Àtà à kupshì ntaʼ a?	Can you make a chair?
Njeñwáè moè' aè vúê, a yá ye, a túr mú ntúñ bluèr, njáèá mgúr mo' ce mi luèu ntaa seê, mi ba njo, e cu'nïì ye mbe tuè aè nfeè' ce e m ce ye byee.	a woman came to him having an alabaster jar of very expensive ointment, and she poured it on his head as he sat at the table.
AÈ ka' ba aèlúèsimbuèu, njeñwáè ca aè kwe foñ.	Afterward the woman also died.
“Yaè masaè, wáè láè mo mkaè'ni, maè'shi laè seè'ni tá yoè ñwáè rfaè' du yi yu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	"Now you are releasing your servant, Master, according to your word, in peace;
Luke	Luêk	2	30	Ma mmir mi yá ñwáè rjaè'	for my eyes have seen your salvation,
Luke	Luêk	2	31	ce wáè tuusi, a duñshi neè beèe wááwá.	which you have prepared before the face of all peoples;
Luke	Luêk	2	32	E yu rraa ce li bo duèñshi yo nduunjïì neè beèe enje jáá keèr geèe tá beèe a ku'si yoè beèe ce yu beèe Isráèl.”	a light for revelation to the nations, and the glory of your people Israel."
Weèe ka' ce geèe wa'a baná ñwáè wááwá be túr fáñ aè rlaèa aè nfeè' yïì ka'. Weèe ka' ce geèe wa'a baná beèe a be rïìñ buu goèr seê, keèr túr ntee aè buu Nyúè.	For you all can prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be exhorted.
E m geèe ñkaè' aè rkuushi noèñ ce a m bi ye, muu Háèrodïìyaè aè bii bii aè bsii beèe ce a m vúè ñkaè', nyor aè boñ ye seê,	But when Herod's birthday came, the daughter of Herodias danced among them and pleased Herod.
Weèr ce feè'shi ba aèmboè weêr mnyor ka'. Weèr ce feè'shi neè beèe ená Jisos Kraâis yu Tataê. Weèr yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè weèe ba njo' Jisoès.	For we don't preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves as your servants for Jesus' sake;
Nyúè aè fa seèe buu wááwá ce seèe aè ba túr, tá seèe bo cu rcu ryáánïì. E m geèe yi ba aètáèr wa'a njo' yi ñger ce yi yu jáá. Njïì ce seèe aè rïìñ aè rcu wa'a yi yu ená seèe riñ ñwáè ce e m ká' seèe ená seèe ba bboèñboñ aèmboè e yu naè.	seeing that his divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us by his own glory and virtue;
M ce sañ buu ca neè weèe tá rïìtu yi bo koo weèe ka'. M ce fa weèe ba ncep njobeè' weèe yu boo wa ce máè koèñ magoèr.	I don't write these things to shame you, but to admonish you as my beloved children.
Woweèe a ka' niñ mbe keñ, fu' yi tetïì.	When they got up into the boat, the wind ceased.
Kúú Nyúè yu ba cuâu bu' ka', yu ba ñger.	For the Kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
Njeèndoñ ca aè ka' laèa mïìsi wáá, woweèe a ka' keè' a ku yá Jisoès mimñgi'. Woweèe a m suñ ñwáè moè' yuu ce woweèe a m yá naè ka'.	When the voice came, Jesus was found alone. They were silent, and told no one in those days any of the things which they had seen.
Woweèe a m duè a ba' aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, a ka' niñ mbe ndaèp, e bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè ba ce sár ba ká aè nduunjïì?”	"He came to Capernaum, and when he was in the house he asked them, ""What were you arguing among yourselves on the way?"""
Woweèe a ka' duâ baè', a yá woweèe mbe shañ ka', a kúti a du a suñ beèe ce a m tuu woweèe naè. A m laèa neè woweèe enáê,	But the officers who came didn't find them in the prison. They returned and reported,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe mo' ce a m ba beèe embe ndap rloo ce a m ce too ená ndap rloo beèe ce a bii faè' bkwaèa ka', ce aè m ba beâe aè rla' Saèiren ba aè rla' AÈláèksandaè ker ba beâe aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè ba Áshaè a m ce sár mnsár a Stáfaèn weèe.	"But some of those who were of the synagogue called ""The Libertines,"" and of the Cyrenians, of the Alexandrians, and of those of Cilicia and Asia arose, disputing with Stephen."
Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ka' ba neè beèe mo' aèmboè yuu ce a cete, baná e yu wa'a ba neè beèe ce a ce bú.	Even if our Good News is veiled, it is veiled in those who perish;
Wèe à fa ye mbàa gòr banɛ e be gàpni moʼ yuu cɛ̀ʼ àgho.	You have given him much money therefore he will reduce part of it and buy clothes with.
Ñwáè Nyúè aè ka' buu yuu, weèe túr yuu anaè, weèe fa ye. Koni neè beèe ce a niñ weèe, gá' neè woweèe boèñboñ.	contributing to the needs of the saints; given to hospitality.
Yèr ŋkòŋkò à koni wèr à nsuu ntìni.	Our helper helped us on the farm today.
tá weèe wááwá bo kuè'si Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis neè ntee e mo'sir ba cuâu moè'sir.	that with one accord you may with one mouth glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Lo rlii a nda?” E beesïì enáê, “La rlii a Ncúèkïì, njobeè' weèr yu aèñgoo.”	"He asked him, ""What is your name?"" He said to him, ""My name is Legion, for we are many."""
Bfúr waê, ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce yá ñgá' a? Ñgaèñ loo neè Nyúè. Ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce lu'shi a? Ñgaèñ yop yáá, nási Nyúè.	Is any among you suffering? Let him pray. Is any cheerful? Let him sing praises.
Jisoès aè ciisïì neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' neè yis beèe Farïìsi ba yïì Hároèd.”	"He warned them, saying, ""Take heed: beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and the yeast of Herod."""
Mbañruèñwáè moè' ce bko' vi m koo ye aè táá njeptii Jisoès.	Behold, a certain man who had dropsy was in front of him.
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' máè kar aè múè le rla' ca, a yá bdïì' ce weèe ce geèe mloo. Máè yá foñ dïû' rfa, a sañ mbe dïì' anaè enáê, ‘Neè Nyúè ce a rïìñ ka'.’ Baná Nyúè ce weèe ce loo neè ye, a riñ ye ka' anaè, a yïì ce m be suñ weèe aèmboè ye.	For as I passed along, and observed the objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: 'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I announce to you.
Weèr aè rïìñ ená weèe aè túr njáèá ntee ca njobeè' weèe ce keè' ba buu ce Nyúè aè kupshi a lá neè weèe mbe buèu. AÈ m ba njobeè' nsuñ mboèñmboñ ce e yu mini ce a m feè'shi, weèe aè ka' riñ aèmboè buu ca.	because of the hope which is laid up for you in the heavens, of which you heard before in the word of the truth of the Good News,
Yàa tarkʉ e ke no rkìŋndàmbàʼ.	My grand father smokes a pipe.
a waa, a laa enáê, “Masaè Jisoès, koosimnse neè weèr.”	"They lifted up their voices, saying, ""Jesus, Master, have mercy on us!"""
To zhi lʉ̀ʼʉ.	The hole has ended.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Nyúè aè m túr ntee boèñboñ neè máè, e gee máè ba njáèá ñwáè ce m yu seè'ni na. Yuu ce e m geèe neè máè anaè yi m bú aè cicïì ka' njobeè' máè m faè' a caa beèe wááwá ce a m ba ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisoès. Yi ke' ba ba ená máè m faè' neè ya ñger ka'. AÈ m ba njobeè' Nyúè aè m túr máè aè ntee boèñboñ, a ka' fa máè ñger anaè.	But by the grace of God I am what I am. His grace which was bestowed on me was not futile, but I worked more than all of them; yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me.
E ka' laèa wa'a, Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Haba! Njeñwáè caê, lo rbyemïì li tap seê. Tá yi ba neè wáè aèmboè aè ce koèñ na.” Muu yïì aè ku ke'se aè nfeè' anaè.	"Then Jesus answered her, ""Woman, great is your faith! Be it done to you even as you desire."" And her daughter was healed from that hour."
E m rïìñ ená woweèe a m ce ko'ndoñ neè Jisoès, a ka' koo ye a vú aègho a fa neè ye.	For he knew that because of envy they had delivered him up.
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Kupshi wo bcáè', yar wo blaba'.” Pitaè aè gee wa'a. E ker laa neè ye enáê, “Yar wo mñgaèbúlaè, vú a máâ mbuèu.”	"The angel said to him, ""Get dressed and put on your sandals."" He did so. He said to him, ""Put on your cloak, and follow me."""
Yïìseèe beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ker ba ñgaâa rsa', a m koo ye a fa ye mbe mmbo govanoè tá a bo sa' ye, yú. A ka' sa', a taa ye mbe kïìntaa.	and how the chief priests and our rulers delivered him up to be condemned to death, and crucified him.
Jisoès aè du yi ba mbe rtuèu Oleèf.	but Jesus went to the Mount of Olives.
E túr aè rba no-ñkoo ka', ce geèe buu ba aè ñger ka'. E be ce geèe buu neè rbonïì- ñwáè. E túr aè rba ñwáè mntañshïì ka'. E fa roñ mbaèa ka'.	not a drinker, not violent, not greedy for money, but gentle, not quarrelsome, not covetous;
Ñwáè ce e ka' tá keè yu' yuu ce ñwáè ntuu Nyúè anaè be keè laèa, geèe yi ka', baná a be keè fúr ñgaèñ efa múè beèe, yú.’	It will be, that every soul that will not listen to that prophet will be utterly destroyed from among the people.'
Nyúè aè m kwaè'shi ená e be geèe yuu ce yi yu boèñboñ neè seèe ce seèe yu beâe seè'ni na, tá e bo geèe tá seèe beèe ca weèe ba aèbee, ba yáánïì a yeâ bsii.	God having provided some better thing concerning us, so that apart from us they should not be made perfect.
E cip àmnʉ.	He has boldly stopped crying.
Ñwáè ce e ke túr ñgwaguèu yu ba nduu. Ñkar nduu ka' táá ce yu' aèmboè nduu anaè ce laèa, baná e be lu'shi magoèr seê. A mboè yi ku ba neè máè wa'a. M ce lu'shi se njobeè' m yu ñkar nduu anaè.	He who has the bride is the bridegroom; but the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices greatly because of the bridegroom's voice. This, my joy, therefore is made full.
Yïì nfeè' rfaè' aè ka' mïì, e kútïì mbe yeâ ndaèp.	It happened, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house.
a laa neè ye enáê, “M be fa wáè ñger ba bkuè' ce aè bto' enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá. A m fa buu ca wááwá neè máè, aède' m fa neè ñwáè ce máè koèñ.	"The devil said to him, ""I will give you all this authority, and their glory, for it has been delivered to me; and I give it to whomever I want."
Bcàŋ ca a bwoo a?	Are these barns yours?
“Nyúè aè laèa enáê, ‘Nfeè' be gháá tá m ye leè' weèr woweèe. M be geèe tá woweèe a kupse yap ntee, ce yu' rboèñ aè rláè wa mncir.’ ”	This is the covenant that I will make with them: 'After those days,' says the Lord, 'I will put my laws on their heart, I will also write them on their mind;' then he says,
Ntaaŋguu ca ce shaŋger sê.	This log of wood is easy to split.
Seèe yoñshi Nyúè njobeè' weèe ce weèe aè m ba bkwaèa neè buu bbebep, aè m kupse, a yu'ni ba neè ryá'nïì ce a m yá'ni weèe naè neè ye ntee wááwá.	But thanks be to God, that, whereas you were bondservants of sin, you became obedient from the heart to that form of teaching whereunto you were delivered.
Fa fyèŋshi mkuu à mʉ̀mo kaʼ.	Donʼt mix it with beans.
máâ keèr vúè yá weèe, tá weèe bo yoèñshi Jisos Kraâis njo' máè.	that your rejoicing may abound in Christ Jesus in me through my presence with you again.
Jisoès aè m jáèr aè mla' mñgoèrñgoèr ba aè mla' mñká'ñká' a ce yá'ni beèe aè wap mndap mloo, a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a ce geèe beèe ce a m ce yañ byañ njáèá jáá jáèá jáá, a ce keè'se.	Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the Good News of the Kingdom, and healing every disease and every sickness among the people.
AÈmboè a sañ enáê, “E m ko' mbekïì” na, baná yi yu ba ená ká? Yi yu ba ená e m káè' entombïì a suu embe dïì' ce e m ba, a ba'si njep nsheè.	"Now this, ""He ascended,"" what is it but that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?"
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè ñkúú Kayisaro OÈgostoè aè fa rsa' ená beèe wááwá a yeâ ñgoèñ a sañ mlii tá e bo beè' beèe.	Now it happened in those days, that a decree went out from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be enrolled.
M ce koèñ ená mmbañruè ce a yu aè bdïì' wááwá a loo. Woweèe a ce loo, a naa mmbo mrara mbekïì, ke' túr ntee yayañ neè beèe moè', káè ba ñgaâa mntañshïì ka'.	I desire therefore that the men in every place pray, lifting up holy hands without anger and doubting.
Weèe rïìñ aèmboè Nyúè ye ye rïìñ foñ naè ená yer ñgeèe ce weèr aè m ce geèe neè weèe ce weèe aè byemi, yi m ba yáánïì. Weèr aè m geèe yuu bebep ka'.	You are witnesses with God, how holy, righteously, and blamelessly we behaved ourselves toward you who believe.
Ryɛʼnì ca li yu àtɛ̀r kaʼ.	This lesson is not easy.
Fa là mɛ̀ mbàa ce wɛ̀ ba laa nà.	Give me the money, which you said.
Seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe ka' ba ñwáè moè'sir, káè ñwáè aè geèe búè áè, káè ñwáè aè geèe búè ka' áè, yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè liseèe rbyemïì ka'. Yuu tatap yi yu ená seèe byemi neè Jisos Kraêis, duñshi liseèe rbyemïì anaè aè liseèe rkoèñnïì.	For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision amounts to anything, nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love.
Ñwáè ce e ce yu' ncir Nyúè ce yi boèñ du misïî, aè ba ncir ce yi fa ñwáè fáñ aè rgeèe buu bboèñboñ, a ker lá ncir anaè boèñboñ aè nfeè' sïìp, Nyúè be ghoèni yuu wááwá ce e ce geèe, njobeè' ñwáè anaè ku ce yu' yu' ka', e ce yu' ce geèe.	But he who looks into the perfect law of freedom, and continues, not being a hearer who forgets, but a doer of the work, this man will be blessed in what he does.
Ŋgwe Nyaakò à càa mbena.	Nyakoʼs dog has passed here.
Beèe wááwá a m ce wáp seê, njobeè' ku' buu bbáèá ba mncoèo ce ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a m ce duèñshi aè ñger Nyúè.	Fear came on every soul, and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba aèbee a Kraêis, baná e kúti ñwáâ nfi; buu brúèú aè mïì, aè ba ba buu bfi seè'ni.	Therefore if anyone is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things have passed away. Behold, all things have become new.
Seèe ce Nyúè aè geèe seèe aè luêñ, seèe ce keè' nfeè' ce seèe be koni buu anaè. Ñwáè aè ka' yá yuu ce e ba ce keè', e ker ce keè' yi ka'. Waè' aède' ñwáè ker cu aè rkeè' yuu ce e yá wáá a?	For we were saved in hope, but hope that is seen is not hope. For who hopes for that which he sees?
Káè ñwáè aè geèe búè áè, káè ñwáè aè geèe búè ka' áè, yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè liseèe rbyemïì ka'. Yuu goèr yi yu ená Nyúè gee tá seèe ba beâe bfi.	For in Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.
Tá Nyúè ka' keè geèe ñgoèñ, e m rïìñ war yuu ce e be geèe neè Kraêis. AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' elúèsimbuèu e geêe, e yáátïì aèwañ njo' weèe.	who was foreknown indeed before the foundation of the world, but was revealed at the end of times for your sake,
Wɛ̌ ke nyaŋshi bzhee waʼa njo kɛ?	Why do you look disapproving lat food like that?
Ñgúè mostaè ca ñwáási a caa ñgúè buu wááwá. Ka' yi yu wa'a, a ke byeè, e ku' caa buu wááwá ce a byeè aè mñkúè, ba seè'ni ba aè ce, bsiñ vi vú ba'ri mndap aè mnta' efa gho.”	"which indeed is smaller than all seeds. But when it is grown, it is greater than the herbs, and becomes a tree, so that the birds of the air come and lodge in its branches."""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	"He said, ""Whoever has ears to hear, let him hear."""
Woweèe a ka' duè baè' aètútú rla' ce woweèe a m ce duè aèfo naè, Jisoès aè gee aèmboè e ce caèa rla' anaè caèa wa'a.	They drew near to the village, where they were going, and he acted like he would go further.
Weèr aè yu' werná beèe mo' a loâ efa weâr mú a jepsi weèe neè buu ce woweèe a m laèa, weèe aè riñ yuu ce weèe táá mbenduè mo ka'. Weèr aè m fa woweèe ñger aè rlaèa buu anaè ka'.	Because we have heard that some who went out from us have troubled you with words, unsettling your souls, saying, 'You must be circumcised and keep the law,' to whom we gave no commandment;
“Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa nteèetu, a ba mbáè'nsúèr aè mntee ker ba aè btuè', weâe ke kuâ reè bkoèr weèe Yú' Rara weèe aè nfeè' wááwá. Yuu ce wee bta a m geèe ku ba yuu ce weèe ce geèe.	"You stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, you always resist the Holy Spirit! As your fathers did, so you do.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	52	Ñwáè ncep ntuu moè' ce wee bta a m buu efa rfa ñgá' neè ye ka', yu yïì efá? Woweèe a m yú beèe ce a m suñ beèe tá nfeè' ka' gháá, ená Ñwáâ Nyáánïì ce vúè naè. Yu ye ñwáâ Nyáánïì anaè ce weèe aè fyeèni a ker yú.	Which of the prophets didn't your fathers persecute? They killed those who foretold the coming of the Righteous One, of whom you have now become betrayers and murderers.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	53	Beèe ce a m koni mncir ce Nyúè aè m caèasi mbe mmbo yïì ncïìndap na aè m koni weèe. Geewa'a, weèe aè láè mncir anaè ka'.”	You received the law as it was ordained by angels, and didn't keep it!"
Weèr aè ka' yá wa'a, a loo Taitoès ce e m káè' rfaè' rjaè' ca ená e du neè rfaè' ca kuèntombïì, ja' weèe tá weèe misi rfaâ' rboèñboñ ce Nyúè aè fa weèe na.	So we urged Titus, that as he made a beginning before, so he would also complete in you this grace.
Noèñ ce Jisoès aè m topshi nshe a gee nfeèp anaè aè ce yá buu naè, aè m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè.	It was a Sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes.
Yuu ce m ce laèa neè weèe, m ce laèa neè beèe wááwá. Fa buumi neè ka'.”	"What I tell you, I tell all: Watch."""
Jisoès aè m ker du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. A ka' baè' a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a ce jáèr mbe dïì' mo' ce a m ce too ená njïì-baaki ñkúú Solomúèn.	It was winter, and Jesus was walking in the temple, in Solomon's porch.
Weâe yu' blaâa Nyúè anaè, weèe ce gee yuu ce yi suñ weèe ená weèe geêe. Weèe aè ka' ku ce yu' blaâa Nyúè yu', ke' ce geèe yuu ce vi laèa ka' baná weèe ce bo' wee btu.	But be doers of the word, and not only hearers, deluding your own selves.
Beèe ce a m ba yap mbe keñ naè, a gú'shïì neè ye, a laa enáê. “AÈ yu Muu Nyúè ghup.”	"Those who were in the boat came and worshiped him, saying, ""You are truly the Son of God!"""
M túr yuu aè rlaèa neè btu embe coêr. M ce laèa aèmboè tu foñ. M yu ñwáè ce máè m yá yuu ce a m geèe neè Kraâis aè nfeè' ce e m yá ñgá', a ba moè' efa múè beèe ce a be koni rboèñ ce Jisoès be keè vúè aègho naè.	I exhort the elders among you, as a fellow elder, and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and who will also share in the glory that will be revealed.
Mluè mi be koo bbyeèñge ce a yu neè mmbúè ba bbyeèñge ce a ce nyoñsi boo. Mluè mi be ba neè beâe aè ñgoèñ ca, tá Nyúè bepsi ntee neè woweèe.	Woe to those who are pregnant and to those who nurse infants in those days! For there will be great distress in the land, and wrath to this people.
Mbeèr aè loè, túè' aè ká' a ce raa. Baná seèe ma' ñgeâe neètú', lor buu bïìr e neèmootïì, yar.	The night is far gone, and the day is near. Let's therefore throw off the works of darkness, and let's put on the armor of light.
Taa neè mñgaèñ njep ye, ku' njep ye, táá tatap aè rbyemïì ce a m yá'ni weèe naè, ker ce yoñshi Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá.	rooted and built up in him, and established in the faith, even as you were taught, abounding in it in thanksgiving.
Bbyeèñge ce a m loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a du aèmbuèu Jisoès naè, a m duè a Josáèf weèe, a yá rsheè, a yá aèmboè a m láè gúâú ñwáè njo.	The women, who had come with him out of Galilee, followed after, and saw the tomb, and how his body was laid.
Nfò à cɛ̀ni mbe kùu.	Nfor has behaved like a woman.
Baná aède' beèe a war neè ye aè njáâá ká ce woweèe a ka' tá byemi neè ye ka'? AÈde' woweèe a byemïì neè ye aè njáâá ká ce woweèe a ka' tá yu' aèmboè ye ka'? AÈde' woweèe a yu' aèmboè ye aè njáâá ká ce ñwáè aè ka' tá feè'shi neè woweèe ka'?	How then will they call on him in whom they have not believed? How will they believe in him whom they have not heard? How will they hear without a preacher?
Caè'ni neè AÈndroènikoès ba Juènayaès ce weèr woweèe yu Juês, woweèe foñ a yá ñgá' mbe shañ aèmboè máè. Woweèe a yu boo mlii aè múè ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraêis. Woweèe a m ba ñgaâa rbyemïì entombïì neè máè.	Greet Andronicus and Junia, my relatives and my fellow prisoners, who are notable among the apostles, who also were in Christ before me.
A mbuèu ce m ce suñ buu neè woweèe ba aè mñgaèa. M ce geèe wa'a tá woweèe a ce keè' ce yá ka', a ce yu'shi, ce yu' ka', a riñ buu foñ ka'.	Therefore I speak to them in parables, because seeing they don't see, and hearing, they don't hear, neither do they understand.
AÈ ka' keèr ba aè nfeè' moè', e duñshïì yïì nyor neè beèe ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu. Beèe anaè a m caèa beèe mjeèe taê. Beèe magoèr efa woweèe a cu bteèe, ka' beèe mo' a kweñger wa'.	Then he appeared to over five hundred brothers at once, most of whom remain until now, but some have also fallen asleep.
Seèe ka' laa ba seenáê, ‘Yi m loè ese ñwáè’, baná beèe a be baèa seèe njobeè' beèe wááwá a byemi ená Joân aè m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.”	"But if we say, 'From men,' we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet."""
Woweèe a ce geèe yaèp buu, a ce wáp Nyúè ka'.”	There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Beèe ce a woweèe a m ce cu, ker ba yïì beèe, a ka' yu' ku' yuu boèñboñ ce Tata Nyúè aè m geèe neè ye na, a lu'shi a woweèe.	Her neighbors and her relatives heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards her, and they rejoiced with her.
AÈ ka' ba noèñ entombïì embe múè ñgaèa, aè mú ñgaèptú', ñgoèñ yi ku bii sii, Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè aè du faèdïì' rsheè li m ba naè. E ka' baè' a yá ená a m caè'si luèr ce a m cete ncuâu rsheè aègho naè.	Now on the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene went early, while it was still dark, to the tomb, and saw the stone taken away from the tomb.
Ka' beèe mo' efa woweèe a m táá njep blaâa Nyúè anaè ka' wa'a, waè' yi yu ená Nyúè aè m buu efa rtáá njep yuu ce e m laèa a?	For what if some were without faith? Will their lack of faith nullify the faithfulness of God?
Jisoès aè laasïì beèe, a niñ mbe keñ a du aè ñgoâñ Magadaèn.	Then he sent away the multitudes, got into the boat, and came into the borders of Magdala.
E ma' yi cáè' njep nsheè, a nyáá mbekïì, a du a yá Jisoès.	He, casting away his cloak, sprang up, and came to Jesus.
Weèe fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' too weèe ená ñwáè ryá'nïì ka', njobeè' weèe ku túr ñwáè ryá'nïì moè'sir caè'caè', ce yu Kraâis anaè.	Neither be called masters, for one is your master, the Christ.
Ka' beèe ce a geèe búè wáá naè, a ce láè mncir wááwá ka'. Woweèe a ku koñ ená weèe gee búè tá a bo naèa tu ená weèe aè yu'ni neè woweèe.	For even they who receive circumcision don't keep the law themselves, but they desire to have you circumcised, that they may boast in your flesh.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Weèr yu ñgúè Abraèhaêm. Weèr aè m be ba bkwaèa neè ñwáè moè' ka'. Wáè ka' ce laèa wáná aè be geèe tá weèr luñ aè njáâá ká?”	"They answered him, ""We are Abraham's seed, and have never been in bondage to anyone. How do you say, 'You will be made free?'"""
E ka' cu mbo ce duè, beèe aè co'nïì bcáè' a laashi njep nduunjïì.	As he went, they spread their cloaks in the way.
“Ñwáè ce e ka' koni mú ghaèrñwáè aèmboè ca fa máâ rlii, baná ñgaèñ aè koni máè. Ñwáè ce e ka' koni máè, baná e koni ba máè ka', e koni ba ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.”	Whoever receives one such little child in my name, receives me, and whoever receives me, doesn't receive me, but him who sent me.
A ka' fúr, e laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè beèe Isráèl, loèr neè nfeè' aè yuu ce weèe ce koèñ aè rgeèe neè beèe ca.	"He said to them, ""You men of Israel, be careful concerning these men, what you are about to do."
a ja' seèe. E m jaè' seèe njo' buu bboèñboñ mo' ce seèe aè m geèe ka'. AÈ m ba njo' yïì ñkoosimnse. E m suè'si viseèe mntee vi ba brara, a fa seèe ryoâñ rfi, yi yú' yi gee seèe aè ba beâe bfi.	not by works of righteousness, which we did ourselves, but according to his mercy, he saved us, through the washing of regeneration and renewing by the Holy Spirit,
Waè' weèe aè gaèp Jisoès a? Waè' ñwáè ce a m taa mbe kïìntaa njo' weèe aè m ba Pol a? Waè' a m baèptir weèe aè rlii Pol a?	Is Christ divided? Was Paul crucified for you? Or were you baptized into the name of Paul?
Nyúè aè m ce máè njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca, ená m fe'shïî, ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisoès, ker ba ñwáè ryá'nïì.	For this, I was appointed as a preacher, an apostle, and a teacher of the Gentiles.
Nfò à yuu ba mrùʼ.	Nfor bought palm wine instead.
Jisoès aè ka' kuè fúú enjep roè, a yá aèmboè rbuu li mú'tïì, a ker yá aèmboè Yú' Rara yi ce suèu mbe yeâ nduè aèmboè beèñ wa'a.	Immediately coming up from the water, he saw the heavens parting, and the Spirit descending on him like a dove.
Jisoès aè ka' ce jáèr aèwaâa rdip rgoèr ce aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a yá Saimúèn ba nfúr yïì ce Andruè, ce a m ba ñgaèa ñkoo nca, aèmboè a ce maè' rraa njep roè.	Passing along by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew the brother of Simon casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
Máè yá aèmboè ncïìndap Nyúè moè' ce suèu embe buèu, a túr ki ce a ke mú' rwee ce lúèsimbuèu yu aègho ka' naè aègho. E m túr ma shañ ñgoèr mbaè boè.	I saw an angel coming down out of heaven, having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
Wèr à ba zhʉshi nyo, geewaʼa e ku ce gʉ̀r.	We killed the snake but it is still shaking.
Yuu anaè yi ka' ce coèo wa'a, ku' beèe a kaarïì aèbee. Woweèe a m báèáñger seê, njobeè' ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m ce laèa, ñwáè nsïìp aè ce yu' aè yïì lïî.	When this sound was heard, the multitude came together, and were bewildered, because everyone heard them speaking in his own language.
Beèe magoèr efa múè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yu' yuu ce e m laèa na, a laa enáê, “Nlaèa ca yi tap seê. Ñwáè ce aède' e byemïì njáèá nlaèa ca a nda?”	"Therefore many of his disciples, when they heard this, said, ""This is a hard saying! Who can listen to it?"""
Baná aè nfeè' wááwá ce seèe aè ka' koni fáñ, seèe gee yuu boèñboñ neè beèe wááwá, lañlañ ñgaâa rbyemïì.	So then, as we have opportunity, let's do what is good toward all men, and especially toward those who are of the household of the faith.
M ka' ba ce kwaè'shi aè ryu' nyor, m ba lúr ka', njobeè' m be kuè ce laèa ba yuu ce yi yu mini. Ka' yi yu wa'a, m be yu' nyor ka' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo kwaè'shi aèmboè máè caèa buu ce m ce geèe, ker ba vïì ce m ce laèa na ka'.	For if I would desire to boast, I will not be foolish; for I will speak the truth. But I refrain, so that no man may think more of me than that which he sees in me, or hears from me.
Bkar waê, cena yu ñwaè' embenjïì ce máè sañ neè weèe. Máè sañ mñwaâ' bbaa ca a ce kuushi weèe buu ca tá weèe bo lá' efa mmirloè ce kwaè'shi buu Nyúè aè njïû yáánïì.	This is now, beloved, the second letter that I have written to you; and in both of them I stir up your sincere mind by reminding you;
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Mmbañruè enjep ñgoèñ na a ce loèr bbyeèñge, bbyeèñge a ce duèse bguèu.	"Jesus said to them, ""The children of this age marry, and are given in marriage."
Yi m ku ba efa rkáè' a Nyúè.	The same was in the beginning with God.
Ka' buu moè' yu goèr mbe buèu ba njep nsheè na ce beèe a ce too ená mnyúè wa'a, ker ce loèr buu anaè aèmboè vi yu lá btaèr neè woweèe wa'a,	"For though there are things that are called ""gods,"" whether in the heavens or on earth; as there are many ""gods"" and many ""lords;"""
A ke tuñ ñwáè, nyor ce keè' mboèñmboñ ka', túr ñger ka'. E fúú efa rkwe, yïì nyor ba mboèñmboñ, túr ñger.	It is sown in dishonor; it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness; it is raised in power.
Pol aè ce Silaès, a ye a duê. Bfúr a m fa woweèe mbe mmbo Nyúè, tá Tata Nyúè bo keè'ni woweèe.	but Paul chose Silas, and went out, being commended by the brothers to the grace of God.
Fa cu neè aèmboè bkwaèa neè ñwáè moè' ka'. Weâe cu wa'a, weèe fa loèr njáèá rcu anaè tá' aè mmïìr, ce geèe buu bbebep ka'. Cu neè ba aèmboè beèe ce a yu bkwaèa neè Nyúè.	as free, and not using your freedom for a cloak of wickedness, but as bondservants of God.
M ̀ ce boo ndap.	I am building a house.
Msur ce mɛ̀ lɛ̀ mbena mi yû?	Where are the pepper that I kept here.
E ke ba wɛ̀ɛ sê.	She is always very slow.
Beèe mo' ce a m ce cïìñ yap njeèe a m ba aè rla' anaè a ba aè mñkúè, a ce cïìñ yap njeèe neètú'.	There were shepherds in the same country staying in the field, and keeping watch by night over their flock.
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “A sañ mbe ye ñwaè' mncir ená Nyúè aè m laèa enáê, ‘Weèe yu mnyúè.’	"Jesus answered them, ""Isn't it written in your law, 'I said, you are gods?'"
Ŋwɛ̀ tʉʼ à nyòʼ mɛ̀.	A witch has bewitched me.
Mmoo mi bɛti àgho a?	I have drank all of my wine.
Baná weèe koo ncúèkïì anaè ese ye, fa neè ñwáè ce e túr ncúèkïì rúú naè.	Take away therefore the talent from him, and give it to him who has the ten talents.
Ñwáè anaè aè m rïìñ ñwáè ce e m geèe ye e luñ efa yi yañ ka', njobeè' Jisoès aè m loè a bú aè múè kúr beèe ce a m ba aèfo.	But he who was healed didn't know who it was, for Jesus had withdrawn, a crowd being in the place.
Ñwáè aè ka' yá'ni yuu mo' jáá, ke' byemi blaèa ce Jisoès aè m laèa ker ba ryá'nïì ce li geèe beèe a ce rïìñ Tata Nyúè ka',	If anyone teaches a different doctrine, and doesn't consent to sound words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness,
“Rlir li yu aèmboè lam neè nyor. Me mmir mi ka' ba yáánïì, baná rraa li yu aè yeè nyoèr wááwá.	"The lamp of the body is the eye. If therefore your eye is sound, your whole body will be full of light.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	23	Me mmir mi ka' tá ba yáánïì ka', baná yeè nyor wááwá be ba aè túè'nji. Ka' ba ená rraa enjep weèe yu túè'nji, baná túè'nji anaè be sii aèmboè ká?	But if your eye is evil, your whole body will be full of darkness. If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is the darkness!
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	24	“AÈde' ñwáè fa' neè mmasaâ bbaa ka'. E ka' gee wa'a, baná e be baèa moè', koèñ moè', yu'ni neè moè', loèr moè' aè yuu ka'. AÈde' aè ce faè' neè Nyúè ker ce faè' neè mbaèa ka'.	No one can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other; or else he will be devoted to one and despise the other. You can't serve both God and Mammon."
a ká' a ce caè'ni ye, a ce laèa enáê, “Nyaèr, ñkwe Juês.”	"They began to salute him, ""Hail, King of the Jews!"""
Ñwáè ce e ce láè nlaèa Nyúè yu ñwáè ce e koèñ Nyúè a misïî. Cena a njïì ce aède' seèe ba seèe Nyúè weèe.	But whoever keeps his word, God's love has most certainly been perfected in him. This is how we know that we are in him:
“Yaè Taê, wáè ka' koêñ, geèe tá ndoñ ñgá' ca caa embe máâ tuè. Geewa'a, ke' ba ená m ce laèa máná aè gee ba aèmboè máè koèñ ka', geèe ba aèmboè wáè koèñ ená yi ba.”	"saying, ""Father, if you are willing, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless, not my will, but yours, be done."""
Ñwáè ce yi ntee yi ka' ku bii fa ye ñgá', ka' yá aèmboè wáè ce wáè túr bfee ce ye byee mbe ndaèp njáèá mnyúè ca, mboè cena yi be fa ye ñger aè rye byee anaè a?	For if a man sees you who have knowledge sitting in an idol's temple, won't his conscience, if he is weak, be emboldened to eat things sacrificed to idols?
Cɛ̀ʼ ca zhi lùu ntaa sê.	This cloth is very expensive.
Wáè ka' cu ba aèmboè ñwáè e ke koèñ, baná aè be kwe. Wáè ka' yú buu ce ñwáè e ke koèñ aè ñger Yú' Nyúè, baná aè be cu.	For if you live after the flesh, you must die; but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.
a laa enáê, “Tataê, yaè ñwáè rfaè' noèñ aè laè', yïì ñgúè' nyor moè' aè kwe, e ce yu' ryañ seê.”	"and saying, ""Lord, my servant lies in the house paralyzed, grievously tormented."""
Woweèe a be keè laèa neè mtuâu mñgoèrñgoèr enáê, ‘Gweèñger neè mbe weâr nduè,’ laèa neè mtuâu mñká'ñká' enáê, ‘Gúèúshi neè weèr.’	Then they will begin to tell the mountains, 'Fall on us!' and tell the hills, 'Cover us.'
Mbʉ zhìsò à kwe.	Our goat is dead.
Beèe ce a be bo'shi ená a woweèe Kraêis, káè ená a woweèe ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, a be nyáá, duèñshi mncoèo, geèe buu bghagha' ce beèe a báêá, ená njïì yi ka' ba tá woweèe a bo bo' ka' neè beèe ce Nyúè aè m ce naè-ñwáè.	For there will arise false christs, and false prophets, and they will show great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen ones.
Ñgaâa mfaè' aè vúê, a laa neè ñwáè ñkúè ca enáê, ‘Masaè, mboè wáè m byeè ñgúè buu bboèñboñ a wáâ ñkúè a? Ñke' yi ka' lo yi ba efá?’	The servants of the householder came and said to him, 'Sir, didn't you sow good seed in your field? Where did this darnel come from?'
‘A máè Nyúè Abraèhaêm, a ba Nyúè Aisïìk, a ker ba Nyúè Jakoèp.’ E yu Nyúè bgúâú beèe ka', e yu ba Nyúè beèe ce a cu bteèe.”	"I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?' God is not the God of the dead, but of the living."""
Jus a ku le' yap enáê, “Weèr túr ncir, aèmboè ncir anaè yi ce laèa, e be kuè kwe njobeè' e ce loèr yïì nyor ená e yu Muu Nyúè.”	"The Jews answered him, ""We have a law, and by our law he ought to die, because he made himself the Son of God."""
Ŋkar zhì e ke wɛp buu sê.	His friend fears a lot.
Máè m laèa cena a ke' ce laèa ba aèmboè beèe ce a máñni Jisoès ka'. Beèe ce a ke saèki, ce ko'ndoñ, ce yáèá, ker ce loo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, a ku ba seèe woweèe njep ñgoèñ na. Tá aè ka' buu efa rkar weèe njáèá beèe ca weèe, baná aè be fúú enjep ñgoèñ na duè faè mo'.	yet not at all meaning with the sexual sinners of this world, or with the covetous and extortioners, or with idolaters; for then you would have to leave the world.
AÈ m ba aè mnoèñ anaè, ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a du aè rla' Antïìyoèk.	Now in these days, prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
Woweèe a ka' ce yu'shi yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa na, Jisoès aè ker ma' ñgaèa neè woweèe njobeè' e m baè' aètútú rla' Jáèrusaláèm, woweèe a ce kwaè'shi ená nfeè' be tuuse ka' tá kúú Nyúè yi ká'.	As they heard these things, he went on and told a parable, because he was near Jerusalem, and they supposed that the Kingdom of God would be revealed immediately.
Baènabaès aè m ce koèñ ená woweèe a du a Joèn Mak weèe.	Barnabas planned to take John, who was called Mark, with them also.
“Máè ka' kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ce geèe rloo mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a yá njáèá rlo mo'.	"It happened that, when I had returned to Jerusalem, and while I prayed in the temple, I fell into a trance,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	18	Máè m yá aèmboè Tata ce laèa neè máè enáê, ‘Naèti cárcár fúú efa rla' Jáèrusaláèm njobeè' beâe aèfo a be yu' yuu ce aè ce suñ woweèe aèmboè máè ka'.’	and saw him saying to me, 'Hurry and get out of Jerusalem quickly, because they will not receive testimony concerning me from you.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	19	Máè laa mánáê, ‘Tataê, beèe ca a rïìñ ená máè m ce duè aè mndap mloo a ce koo beèe ce a byemi neè wáè a ce fa aè bshañ, a ce lïìp beèe mo' efa woweèe.	I said, 'Lord, they themselves know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue those who believed in you.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	20	AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' ce a m ce yú Stáfaèn ce e m ce suñ beèe aèmboè wáè, má máè aè táá aèfo a ce yu' rboèñ, a ce keè'ni bcáâ' beèe ce a m ce yú ye.’	When the blood of Stephen, your witness, was shed, I also was standing by, and consenting to his death, and guarding the cloaks of those who killed him.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	22	21	E laa neè máè enáê, ‘Kuè du njobeè' m be tuu wáè tá aè du aènjïìsaèp seê, duè yá beèe enje jáá.’ ”	He said to me, 'Depart, for I will send you out far from here to the Gentiles.'"""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè ba ba mnfeèp, weèe aè ba ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep ka'. AÈmboè weèe ce laèa ená weèe ce yá buu, baná weèe ku cu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"Jesus said to them, ""If you were blind, you would have no sin; but now you say, 'We see.' Therefore your sin remains."
E m laèa neè beèe ce a m ce fyeèni bbeèñ naè enáê, “Loèr neè buu anaè duse aègho. Weèe aè geèe ndap yaè Ta aè kútïì ndap ntaa njoká?”	"To those who sold the doves, he said, ""Take these things out of here! Don't make my Father's house a marketplace!"""
AÈmboè Taèr ce e yu nteèe aè tuu máè, máè cu nteèe njobeè' ye, baná ñwáè ce e ka' ye yaè nyor, e be cu nteèe njo' máè.	As the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father; so he who feeds on me, he will also live because of me.
“Loèr neè nfeè' neè beèe ce a ce nya' mnde' ená a woweèe ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè. Woweèe a ce vúè aè ryá weèe, ma' ñguèp njeèe, wáâ fyá' njep mú, woweèe a ba aèmboè bkuura ce vi ce roèo yuu ye.	"Beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are ravening wolves.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	16	Weèe be rïìñ woweèe neè yaèp ndeèe. Waè' aède' beèe a kúú leèemú embe mnoèo a? Waè' aède' beèe a kúú piyaè embe msini a?	By their fruits you will know them. Do you gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	17	Yi ku ba foñ ená mbaâñ boèñboñ yi ke yú mbe ce boèñboñ, mbaâñ bebep yi yú mbe ce bebep.	Even so, every good tree produces good fruit; but the corrupt tree produces evil fruit.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	18	AÈde' mbaâñ bebep yi yú mbe ce boèñboñ ka', aède' mbaâñ boèñboñ yi yú mbe ce bebep ka'.	A good tree can't produce evil fruit, neither can a corrupt tree produce good fruit.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	19	Ce ce yi ka' tá yú boèñboñ ka', baná a be gwaèr, maè' njep mor.	Every tree that doesn't grow good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	20	Baná weèe be rïìñ ñgaâa nya' mnde' ca neè yaèp ndeèe.	Therefore, by their fruits you will know them.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	21	“Yu ñwáè wááwá ce e ce laèa neè máè enáê, Tataê, Tataê, ce e be keèe niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè ka'. Ñwáè ce e be keèe niñ mbo yu ba ñwáè ce e ce geèe yuu ce yaè Ta embe buèu ce koèñ.	Not everyone who says to me, 'Lord, Lord,' will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; but he who does the will of my Father who is in heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	22	Be keèe ba aè noèñ anaè tá beèe magoèr a laa neè máè enáê, ‘Tataê, Tataê, mboè weèr aè m cep yo ntuu a wáâ rlii, a fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe, a gee buu bghagha' a wáâ rlii a?’	Many will tell me in that day, 'Lord, Lord, didn't we prophesy in your name, in your name cast out demons, and in your name do many mighty works?'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	23	Woweèe a laèa wa'a, tá m laa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Máè rïìñ weèe ka'. Loè neè efa máâ geñ, weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.’	Then I will tell them, 'I never knew you. Depart from me, you who work iniquity.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	24	“Baná ñwáè ce e ka' yu' buu ce máè laèa na, gee vi, ñgaèñ yu aèmboè ñwáè bfee ce e m baè'ri yïì ndap mbenduè ryáá,	Everyone therefore who hears these words of mine, and does them, I will liken him to a wise man, who built his house on a rock."
Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger Básábuèl ce e yu ñkúú byú' mnyúâmkaè'.”	"But some of them said, ""He casts out demons by Beelzebul, the prince of the demons."""
E m̀ kàʼni mɛ̀ enɛ e be fa mɛ̀ mbàa.	He promised me that he is going to give me money.
Ka' ya yañ aè m ba yïì ce weèe aè m ba cañ efa máâ geñ wa'a, weèe aè m loèr máè aè yuu cicïì ka'. Weèe aè m gá' neè máè aèmboè weèe ce gá' lá ba neè ncïìndap Nyúè wa'a. Neè mini-ñwáè, weèe aè m gá' neè máè aèmboè weèe ce gá' lá ba neè Jisos Kraâis wa'a.	That which was a temptation to you in my flesh, you didn't despise nor reject; but you received me as an angel of God, even as Christ Jesus.
Jisoès aè m ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a ka' ce duè, a lor ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, a woweèe a lá'sïì nyor, e laa neè woweèe enáê,	As Jesus was going up to Jerusalem, he took the twelve disciples aside, and on the way he said to them,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, e koo kúr bsoogáè ba ñgaâa rkeè'ni Ndap Nyúè ese ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba Farïìsïî, a woweèe a ka' ce duè, a lor blam a cú', a bársi msuèsuèñ, a lor buu bïìr.	Judas then, having taken a detachment of soldiers and officers from the chief priests and the Pharisees, came there with lanterns, torches, and weapons.
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weâe duè, weèe laa weená ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a vúè neètú' a yáá gúâú ñwáè, weèe aè ce lá buumi.	"saying, ""Say that his disciples came by night, and stole him away while we slept."
Mgʉr mi yu àgho a?	Is there any oil?
Pol aè m ce laèa beèe a ku ce yu'shi, e ka' ce laèa aèmboè beèe enje jáá, woweèe a ghaêa, a laa enáê, “Weèe fa maè'shi ye ka', yú neè ye.”	"They listened to him until he said that; then they lifted up their voice, and said, ""Rid the earth of this fellow, for he isn't fit to live!"""
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená ñwáè ka' lor yïì nyor gee e ba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor kwaèraè baná a ye a yu seè'ni ba ñwáè moè'sir a? A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Mbañruèñwáè ba njeñwáè ca a be ba nyor moè'sir.”	"Or don't you know that he who is joined to a prostitute is one body? For, ""The two,"" says he, ""will become one flesh."""
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá nyaèa moè' aèmboè e fúú enjep nsheè. Nyaèa anaè aè m túr mdoñ mbe tuè aèmbo mdoñ ya' ce yi ku bii ká'. Mdoñ anaè mi m ba mi mmbaa. Yïì njeèndoñ aè m feese njeèndoñ nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè.	I saw another beast coming up out of the earth. He had two horns like a lamb, and he spoke like a dragon.
Joân aè beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' túr bcáâ' bbaa, e fa mo' neè ñwáè ce e túr ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' túr byee, e ku gee wa' foñ.”	"He answered them, ""He who has two coats, let him give to him who has none. He who has food, let him do likewise."""
Nfò e ke gèe rfàʼ àmbò zhìi tâa waʼa.	Nfor works like his father.
E ke bèenjì muu wàp ce e tèetu nà sê.	She usually backs that his junior brother who is very stubborn.
A m yá'ni Musïìs bfee beâe aè ñgoâñ Ijïìp wááwá, e ba ñwáâ ñgoèr aè vi blaèa ker ba yi ñgeèe.	Moses was instructed in all the wisdom of the Egyptians. He was mighty in his words and works.
Kuè táá tatap njep lo rbyemïì, lá yo ntee rara. Beèe mo' a kani yuu ce yap ntee yi ce suñ woweèe, a sa'si lap rbyemïì.	holding faith and a good conscience; which some having thrust away made a shipwreck concerning the faith;
Weèr aè vúè aèfa aè rsuñ weèe Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ená Nyúè aè fúr Jisoès efa rkwe. Baná yuu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be geèe neè viseèe bta naè,	We bring you good news of the promise made to the fathers,
Jus a túr sá' goèr seê. Yuu entombïì yi yu ená Jus a beèe ce Nyúè aè m fa vi blaèa mba waâp mmboè.	Much in every way! Because first of all, they were entrusted with the oracles of God.
Bár beèe a laa yap enáê, “Beè táá ka wa' láê; seèe yá ka ená waè' AÈlajaè be vúè jaè' ye lá.”	"The rest said, ""Let him be. Let's see whether Elijah comes to save him."""
“AÈ wáâ rkweê, yo ñger yi yuê? AÈ wáâ rkweê, yoè nsïìi yuê?”	Death, where is your sting? Hades, where is your victory?
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “A ker sañ enáê, ‘Fa moèoshi Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè ka'.’ “	"Jesus said to him, ""Again, it is written, 'You shall not test the Lord, your God.'"""
Woweèe a m ce jáèr aè brïìñ ba aè mtuèu, a ce cu ba aè mmbúè' ba aè mntoèñ. Ñgoèñ ca yi m ba yáánïì neè woweèe aè rcu njo ka'.	(of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts, mountains, caves, and the holes of the earth.
Wɛ̀ kʉʉ sàʼ anà e cɛp kaʼ.	You have filed that cutlass and it is not sharp.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni njobeè' weèe ce jáèr aè mñgoèñ a ce jáèr aè bkeñ tá weèe bo geèe ka' ñwáè moè'sir áè, kupse byemi neè Nyúè. E ce kupse, weèe gee ye e misïì bep caa weèe ñkaèraè' baa.	Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you travel around by sea and land to make one proselyte; and when he becomes one, you make him twice as much of a son of Gehenna as yourselves.
doc soso nè yer kùu.	We will trek and go there ourselves.
Nyúè aè ce ba beèe ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ce kwaè'shi ená a yu blúr tá rïìtu yi bo koo beèe ce a ce kwaè'shi ená a yu ñgaâa bfee. E m ce beèe ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ a kwaè'shi ená a yu bgoè'sïì tá rïìtu yi bo koo beèe ce a túr ñger.	but God chose the foolish things of the world that he might put to shame those who are wise. God chose the weak things of the world, that he might put to shame the things that are strong;
Gheèter neè riñ buu ce vi boèñ Tata Jisoès.	proving what is well pleasing to the Lord.
Ñwáè anaè aè ma'shïì ená e laêa. Pol aè táá mbe dïì' ce e m ko' a táá naè, a naa bo mbekïì ená beèe a cu nyañ. Beèe a ka' cu nyañ, e laa neè woweèe aè li Hibruè enáê,	When he had given him permission, Paul, standing on the stairs, beckoned with his hand to the people. When there was a great silence, he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, saying,
Beèe wááwá a yá aèmboè e ce jáèr, a ce kuè'si Nyúè.	All the people saw him walking and praising God.
Geewa'a, yeèr nfeè' rduè aè ka' gháá, weèr aè natïì a ce duè. Woweèe wááwá ba wap bbyeèñge ba boo wap a m fúú efa lap rla' ca a du weèr woweèe. Weèr woweèe aè ka' baè' aèwaâa roè, a gú'shi neè mñkúúshi a loo,	When it happened that we had accomplished the days, we departed and went on our journey. They all, with wives and children, brought us on our way until we were out of the city. Kneeling down on the beach, we prayed.
Beèe mo' a ka' kani yuu ce e ce suñ woweèe, e lor nfeè' nashi neè woweèe njobeè' aède' Nyúè gee woweèe a kupseè yap ntee lo byemi yuu ce yi yu mini,	in gentleness correcting those who oppose him: perhaps God may give them repentance leading to a full knowledge of the truth,
Saimún Pitaè aè lap ye ená e bipshi neè Jisoès ená e ce laèa ba aèmboè nda lá.	"Simon Peter therefore beckoned to him, and said to him, ""Tell us who it is of whom he speaks."""
Woweèe a koosimnse seê, a ká' a ce bipshi aè moè'sir aè moè'sir enáê, “Tataê, waè' a máè a?”	"They were exceedingly sorrowful, and each began to ask him, ""It isn't me, is it, Lord?"""
Pailáèt aè kútïì mbe nto' a ká' Jisoès a laa neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñkúú Jus a?”	"Pilate therefore entered again into the Praetorium, called Jesus, and said to him, ""Are you the King of the Jews?"""
A ka' laèa neè ye wa'a, e lá woweèe mbaè múè ndap embe shañ, a taa woweèe aè buè'.	who, having received such a command, threw them into the inner prison, and secured their feet in the stocks.
Mɛ̀ mʉ ce bii tàrà nè mbaʼ.	I danced ‘Tara’ with a rattle.
E m ker ma' ñgaèa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Ñwáè mbaèa moè' aè m ba a túr yïì ñwáè rfaè' moè', beèe a vú a suñ ye ená yïì ñwáè rfaè' anaè ce jarsi yïì buu.	"He also said to his disciples, ""There was a certain rich man who had a manager. An accusation was made to him that this man was wasting his possessions."
E yu Nyúè bgúâú beèe ka', e yu ba Nyúè beèe ce a cu bteèe. E rïìñ yi ená beèe wááwá a cu bteèe.”	"Now he is not the God of the dead, but of the living, for all are alive to him."""
Mkuu mmoo mi fʉʉ a?	Have your beans germinated.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce boñshi li ryoèñ, baná e be bá li. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá boñshi li ryoèñ ka', baná e be koni li.	Whoever seeks to save his life loses it, but whoever loses his life preserves it.
Yi yu neè weèe wa' foñ. Weèe aè ka' ce laèa neè beèe ba aè li ce a rïìñ ka', aède' woweèe a yu' yuu ce weèe ce laèa aè njáâá ká? Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná weèe ce búsi yeè mbáp aè cicïì.	So also you, unless you uttered by the tongue words easy to understand, how would it be known what is spoken? For you would be speaking into the air.
Mɛ̀ koo mnjèe mbaa ba ntoʼ.	I have taken two hundred and half.
E ka' baè', beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba btu efa múè Jus a vúê, a yá ye a suñ ye buu ce Pol aè m geèe. Woweèe a m laèa neè ye tatap	Then the high priest and the principal men of the Jews informed him against Paul, and they begged him,
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m ba ená e be fa muu yïì ce aè m ba muu rñgoèo njep ñgoèñ, a laa enáê, “Tá bcïìndap Nyúè wááwá a gú'shi neè ye.”	"Again, when he brings in the firstborn into the world he says, ""Let all the angels of God worship him."""
Weèe wááwá aè koni bfee ese Nyúè. Baná weèe lor bfee anaè ja' wee mnyor aègho. Wee geèe wa'a baná weèe aè loèr yuu ce Nyúè aè m fa neè weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, a fa' aègho yáánïì.	As each has received a gift, employ it in serving one another, as good managers of the grace of God in its various forms.
Me ke kòŋ mnàŋ kaʼ.	I donʼt like jealousy.
E m geèe rfaè' ce Nyúè aè m ce ye ená e gee naè neè mini-ñwáè. E m ku gee rfaè' anaè neè mini-ñwáè aèmboè Musïìs ye ye aè m geèe neè beèe Nyúè naè.	who was faithful to him who appointed him, as also was Moses in all his house.
E ku fa mɛ̀ ba mʉcàr.	She has given me only very little.
Bkar waê, seèe koñni njobeè' rkoèñnïì li loè ese Nyúè. Ñwáè wááwá ce e koèñ beèe, yu muu Nyúè, a ker riñ Nyúè.	Beloved, let us love one another, for love is of God; and everyone who loves is born of God, and knows God.
keèr túr ñger aè rjuèu byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe.	and to have authority to heal sicknesses and to cast out demons:
E m bo' yïìseèe beèe, a jar neè viseèe btaê, a gee woweèe a fúr boo wap aèwañ, tá a bo kweñger.	The same took advantage of our race, and mistreated our fathers, and forced them to throw out their babies, so that they wouldn't stay alive.
Yi nlaèa yi yu ená seèe byemi neè Muu yïì ce Jisos Kraêis, ker koñni aèmboè e m laèa neè seèe.	This is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ, and love one another, even as he commanded.
Ca a yaa bàa tàraʼmɛ̀.	This is my personal bag.
Woowèe a taŋ nsuu ese wèr, a fâp.	They fought for our farm and seized it.
A mbuèu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená ñwáè ka' ce koèñ ená e naa nyor, baná e naa ba aè yuu ce Tata Nyúè aè geèe neè ye.	"that, according as it is written, ""He who boasts, let him boast in the Lord."""
Ñwáè aè ka' bepsi Ndap Nyúè baná Nyúè be bepsi ñgaèñ. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' Ndap Nyúè yu nrara, Ndap Nyúè anaè aè ba weèe.	If anyone destroys the temple of God, God will destroy him; for God's temple is holy, which you are.
Baná mboâñtu ce Jus a túr a caa beèe moè' yu ká? Waè' búè ce ñwáè aè geèe e túr sá' moè' neè ñgaèñ a?	Then what advantage does the Jew have? Or what is the profit of circumcision?
E ka' laèa wa'a, a karsi nyor a laa ca ba neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu caè'caè'. E m laèa neè woweèe aè bsúèti enáê, “Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a ce yá buu ce weèe ce yá na.	"Turning to the disciples, he said privately, ""Blessed are the eyes which see the things that you see,"
Geewa'a, máè geèe rloo neè wáè ená lo rbyemïì li fa mïì ka'. E ba aè nfeè' ce lo rbyemïì li kúti a ba rtatap, aè tapsi bfúr wo.”	"but I prayed for you, that your faith wouldn't fail. You, when once you have turned again, establish your brothers."""
Lávïì aè m geèe ma ñkaè' neè ye mbe yeâ ndaèp. Ku' ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ker ba beèe mo' a m ba mbo foñ a cute a sir tábuèr a woweèe a ce yeñger.	Levi made a great feast for him in his house. There was a great crowd of tax collectors and others who were reclining with them.
AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Yi ka' ba ba wa'a, e ka' sa' ñgoèñ aè njáâá ká?	May it never be! For then how will God judge the world?
Wáâ Timotïì, wáè rïìñ la ryá'nïì ba njáèá njïì ce m ce cu la rcu, a riñ yuu ce m ce koèñ aè rgeèe njep ñgoèñ na, a yá la rbyemïì, a yá njáèá njïì ce m ce kur ntee, a yá la rkoèñnïì, a yá foñ aèmboè máè táá tatap neè Jisoès,	But you did follow my teaching, conduct, purpose, faith, patience, love, steadfastness,
Muunje ce e m ke'ni ncúèúndúè' naè aè laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Mboè aè yu moè' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu ñwáè ca lá?” E laa enáê, “M yu moè' ka'.”	"Then the maid who kept the door said to Peter, ""Are you also one of this man's disciples?"" He said, ""I am not."""
Pailáèt aè ka' yu' ená Jisoès aè ba kwe wáá, a tarni seê. A ká' ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe caè. E ka' vúè, e bipshïì neè ye ená Jisoès aè ba kwe wáá lá.	Pilate marveled if he were already dead; and summoning the centurion, he asked him whether he had been dead long.
Jisoès aè ka' yá mbe dïì' ana, beè', a ceteè ñwaè', a kúsi neè ñwáè ce e ba koo ese ye, a cu aè nsheè. Beèe embe ndaèp rloo wááwá a m ku ce fyá' ba ye.	He closed the book, gave it back to the attendant, and sat down. The eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on him.
Woweèe a yu beèe enjep ñgoèñ na ka', aèmboè má máè yu ñwáè enjep ñgoèñ na ka' naè.	They are not of the world even as I am not of the world.
Beèe ce Nyúè aè m rïìñ wáá ená a be ba yïì beèe naè, e m laèa ená e be geèe tá woweèe a feese muu yïì, tá muu yïì anaè bo ba muu nlee neè bfúr magoèr.	For whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brothers.
Ñwáè ce e kwaè'shi ená e túr bfee aè rsuñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe e rïîñ, a ker ce kwaè'shi ená Yú' Nyúè yi fa ye bfee aè rgeèe buu mo' foñ, aè ba rïìñ ená buu ce máè suñ neè weèe na yu buu ce aè laèa Tata Jisoès ená seèe geêe.	If any man thinks himself to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him recognize the things which I write to you, that they are the commandment of the Lord.
Jisoès aè ka' loè embo ce duè, a yá ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Matïìyoè aèmboè e cu mbe dïì' rfaè' ce e m ce koo mbaèa baèraè'. E laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu.” Matïìyoè aè ku nati a du a yeâ mbuèu.	"As Jesus passed by from there, he saw a man called Matthew sitting at the tax collection office. He said to him, ""Follow me."" He got up and followed him."
Nfúr ce e yu ñwáè fuèp aè ba ce lu'shi ená Nyúè aè naèa ye mbekïì,	But let the brother in humble circumstances glory in his high position;
njobeè' seèe túr rla' mo' njep ñgoèñ na ce li be cu nfeseè ka', seèe ce keè' ba rla' ce li bii ka' ba.	For we don't have here an enduring city, but we seek that which is to come.
Boote ŋwàʼ a be saŋ jamishon à ŋwɛɛ mbo.	School children will be writing examination next month.
Máè ke' rïìñ ya yu yuu bebep mo' ce máè geèe ka'. Yi ke' ba ená aède' m sa' mnsa' embe máâ tuè, teni ená máè so ka'. Ñwáè ce aède' e sa' wa mnsa' teni, a Tataê.	For I know nothing against myself. Yet I am not justified by this, but he who judges me is the Lord.
Yuu ce woweèe a m laèa yi m ku ba ba aèmboè mnsár ce a woweèe a m ce sár aèmboè njáèá njïì ce a woweèe a ke loo neè Nyúè, ker ba foñ aèmboè ñwáè moè' ce e m kwe, ce a m ce too ená Jisoès ce Pol aè m ce laèa ená e cu nteèe naè.	but had certain questions against him about their own religion, and about one Jesus, who was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive.
Weèe ja' beèe ce a buu yuu, neè ku' buu ce weèe túr seè'ni na, wee weèe aè ka' buu yuu, woweèe a túr, tá a bo jaè' weèe aègho foñ. Yi ba seè'ni ená ñwáè wááwá aè túr yuu ce e buu.	but for equality. Your abundance at this present time supplies their lack, that their abundance also may become a supply for your lack; that there may be equality.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe túr bráâd bsá'?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr túr bráâd saèambaê.”	"He asked them, ""How many loaves do you have?"" They said, ""Seven."""
Ŋkar à goo sê.	My friend is very selfish.
Njeèndoñ anaè aè ka' laèa wa'a, a ba'shïì woweèe efa bkúè tá woweèe a bo yú ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa beèe enjep ñgoèñ. A m kur bcïìndap bbebep ce a m ba kyeèe na a lá wa'a, woweèe a ce keè' ba nfeâ' aè noèñ anaè, embe ñwáá anaè, embe feè' anaè tá a bo geèe lap rfaè' aè nfeè' anaè.	The four angels were freed who had been prepared for that hour and day and month and year, so that they might kill one third of mankind.
Wěr tàʼ enɛ sèe dû sèʼni na.	We intend that we should go immediately.
AÈ m ce ba aè ñkaè' ca, Pailáèt fúr ñwáè shañ moè'sir efa shañ. E m ce fúr ba ñwáè ce beèe a koèñ.	Now at the feast he used to release to them one prisoner, whom they asked of him.
Fa wèr mdip tɛ wèr lipnyʉ̀ àgho.	Give us water to quench our thirst with.
Cena foñ yi geèe beèe ce map mkwaè'shïì mi jep a ker riñ yuu mini ka', a ce sár mnsár. Woweèe a ce kwaè'shi ba ená buu Nyúè yu buu ce a be koni sá' enjo.	constant friction of people of corrupt minds and destitute of the truth, who suppose that godliness is a means of gain. Withdraw yourself from such.
Mkaèñsïì mi be gweèñger embe buèu, tá buu ñger embe buèu bsïìp vi ci'tïî.	the stars will be falling from the sky, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
Máèári aè laa neè ncïìndap Nyúè anaè enáê, “Máè be riñ mbañruèñwáè ka'. Baná aètaè ca yi ba wa' aè njáâá ká?”	"Mary said to the angel, ""How can this be, seeing I am a virgin?"""
Máè ka' keè' a yá ma rdip mo' li ce raa, ce tose aèmboè glaâs wa'a. Li m ba kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè'. Buu bteèe vi m táá bdïì' kyeèe a kaari kaèbaèraè' anaè a tarte. Buu bteèe anaè vi m túr mmir aèñgoo seê. Mmir mo' mi m ba kuèntombïì, mmo' mi ba mbenjïì.	Before the throne was something like a sea of glass, similar to crystal. In the midst of the throne, and around the throne were four living creatures full of eyes before and behind.
Woowèe a fàp zhii cɛ̀ʼ à ŋger.	They seized his cloth by force.
Ŋgàŋ e bàpsi mmir àmbò nzhɛ̀ɛ waʼa.	The man is blinking like a thief.
E m laèa wa'a njobeè' e m geèe ñgaâa byañ magoèr a ke'se, ñgaâa byañ mo' a ce gheèter aè rjoèo ye ená a bo keè'se foñ.	For he had healed many, so that as many as had diseases pressed on him that they might touch him.
njobeè' beèe wááwá a geèe buu bbebep, a sá efa foèo ce yi loè ese Nyúè.	for all have sinned, and fall short of the glory of God;
Beèe ce a ce geèe ba yuu ce yaèp nyor koèñ, a ku ce kwaè'shi ba aèmboè yaèp nyor. Beèe ce a ce geèe ba buu ce Yú' Nyúè yi koèñ, a ku ce kwaè'shi ba aèmboè buu Nyúè.	For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit, the things of the Spirit.
Seèe ce seèe yu seè'ni aèmboè ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m boo neè nshe, seèe be keè ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e m suèu embe buèu aè noèñ mo'.	As we have borne the image of those made of dust, let's also bear the image of the heavenly.
aè lá lo rfa anaè mbe gee dïû' ntoèo rfa, be du yá ye tá weèe ye nashi bcuèu, tá aè ka' kúti fa lo rfa anaè.	leave your gift there before the altar, and go your way. First be reconciled to your brother, and then come and offer your gift.
Geewa'a, mbúè nyúè'tu embe tu moè' efa weèe be bú ka'.	And not a hair of your head will perish.
A ka' ce duè mbo Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Be ba neètú' e ntïìni na, tá weèe wááwá cañse ma' máè. Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, ‘M be lïìp ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe tá njeèe yi da'se.’	"Then Jesus said to them, ""All of you will be made to stumble because of me tonight, for it is written, 'I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.'"
E ku bii fàʼ nje Mbòr a?	Is he still working at Mbot?
E m geèe yuu ce e m ce yu' rboèñ aègho, a gee seèe aè riñ buu ce aède' seèe aè m ba riñ ka', ce yu buu ce e m kwaè'shi ená e be loèr Jisos Kraâis geèe aègho.	making known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he purposed in him
Sèe be bèesi ŋwàʼ Nyʉ̀ à Limbùm tɛ bèe a beʼ bòŋboŋ sê.	When we shall translate the Bible into Limbum, people will read it very well.
Yaa cùu zhi yu mbòmmbo.	My mouth is empty.
Ka' cu ñgoèñ yi ci'tïì, a ci' kuâu shañ foñ. Bkeèñ shañ vi mú'ñgeèr njaè' moè'sir, bkwaèñ vi gweñgeâr aè mkoo ñgaâa shañ wááwá.	Suddenly there was a great earthquake, so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; and immediately all the doors were opened, and everyone's bonds were loosened.
Nfò tʉr ŋger sê.	Nfor is very powerful.
Woowèe a ku ce tàa mɛ̀ enɛ m̀ fa woowèe yaa mbàa.	They are just forcing me to give them my money.
a fa ye mruè' ce a m fïìñshi neè ñgúè-cece' ená e no. E ka' yu'shi, a kani efa rno.	They gave him sour wine to drink mixed with gall. When he had tasted it, he would not drink.
Bfúr weêr, weèr rïìñ ená Nyúè aè koèñ weèe, a ce weèe.	We know, brothers loved by God, that you are chosen,
Pitaè aè du a yeâ mbuèu a ba yi encaèñ, a du a ba' mbe mambe ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. E ka' baè' a cu njepmbeè a ce yár mor a beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè weèe.	Peter had followed him from a distance, until he came into the court of the high priest. He was sitting with the officers, and warming himself in the light of the fire.
Jisoès aè suusïì mñgoommir.	Jesus wept.
Beèe ce a m ce cïìñ ñkuânyaèm ca a ka' yá yuu ce yi m koni, a cañ a duê, a suñ yuu ce yi m koni na aè laè', a ker suñ neè beèe ce a m ba aè mñkúè.	When those who fed them saw what had happened, they fled, and told it in the city and in the country.
E m bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè m byemi wa'a, a koni Yú' Rara a?” Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè m be yu' yuu mo' aèmboè Yú' Rara ka'.”	"He said to them, ""Did you receive the Holy Spirit when you believed?"" They said to him, ""No, we haven't even heard that there is a Holy Spirit."""
E ka' kuè bii ce laèa, mmbaè' ce rraa li m ce fúú enjo vi vú a cete woweèe, njeèndoñ aè laa embe múè mmbaè' anaè enáê, “Cena yu muu waè, ce máè koèñ seê, a ce yu' rboèñ neè ye. Ce yu' neè yuu ce e ce laèa.”	"While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. Behold, a voice came out of the cloud, saying, ""This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Listen to him."""
Nfeè' ce a be loèr Jisoès duè aègho mbe buèu aè ka' gháá, e kur ntee a nati a ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	It came to pass, when the days were near that he should be taken up, he intently set his face to go to Jerusalem,
Ñwáè ce e sañ ñwaè' ca aè sañ máâ Saimún Pitaè. M yu ñwáè rfaè' a ker ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè beèe ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis aèmboè wer weèr foñ aè byemi naè. Rbyemïì ca li boèñ a caa buu wááwá. Jisos Kraâis aè fa seèe njïì ená seèe byemi neè ye njobeè' e ke geèe buu aè njïû yáánïì. E yu Nyúè a ker ba yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè'.	Simon Peter, a servant and apostle of Jesus Christ, to those who have obtained a like precious faith with us in the righteousness of our God and Savior, Jesus Christ:
AÈmboè m ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè wáè seè'ni na, m ce kwaè'shi ená ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá m vú yá wáè.	These things I write to you, hoping to come to you shortly;
Ŋgàa ŋgwaʼ a no mrùʼ a lɛ mmisò fɛ?	The meeting members drank wine and where is ours?
Jisoès aè m niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a juu beèe wááwá ce a m ce fyeèni buu, ba beèe ce a m ce yuu buu mbo, a bute btábuèr ese beèe ce a m ce kupse mbaèa, a bute mnta' ese beèe ce a m ce fyeèni bbeèñ.	Jesus entered into the temple of God, and drove out all of those who sold and bought in the temple, and overthrew the money changers' tables and the seats of those who sold the doves.
AÈ m ba aè noèñ ce beèe a m ce tami nyor aè noâñ mmbomntaa Nyúè.	It was the day of the Preparation, and the Sabbath was drawing near.
E bàʼ mbe tase na a jeŋte.	She arrived at this junction and was confused.
Pailáèt aè ker bipshi neè ye enáê, “AÈ túr yuu laèa ka' a? AÂ yu' ku' buu ce a ce laèa aèmboè wáè na lañ?”	"Pilate again asked him, ""Have you no answer? See how many things they testify against you!"""
Ka' yi yu wa'a, seèe ce koèñ ená nyor bep beèe ca neè seèe ka'. Duè mbaè roè, ma' yoè huk njep roè, nca ce wáè ka' koo entombïì, aè mú' cuèu efa gho. Wáâ múè', tá aè yá mbaèa koâo. Wáâ yá, aè fúr, la' mbaèa ya ba yo aègho.”	"But, lest we cause them to stumble, go to the sea, cast a hook, and take up the first fish that comes up. When you have opened its mouth, you will find a stater coin. Take that, and give it to them for me and you."""
E yá'nïì woweèe buu magoèr aè mñgaèa. E m laèa neè woweèe enáê,	He taught them many things in parables, and told them in his teaching,
Yi nyúè'tu yi m ce fúp aèmboè mmbaè', mi mmir mi ba aèmboè mcuèñ mor wa'a.	His head and his hair were white as white wool, like snow. His eyes were like a flame of fire.
Fa beè'ni neè buu ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ce geèe ka'. Maè'shi neè tá Nyúè kupse me mkwaè'shïì tá weèe bo geèe ñgeâe fi. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, weèe riñ yuu ce Nyúè koèñ. Weèe be rïìñ yuu ce yi yu boèñboñ, aè ba yuu ce Nyúè ce yu' rboèñ aègho, a ba yáánïì.	Don't be conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind, so that you may prove what is the good, well-pleasing, and perfect will of God.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a duñshi woweèe mi mmbo ba yïì mbeèp nyor. Ñgaèa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá Tataê, a lu'shi seê.	When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side. The disciples therefore were glad when they saw the Lord.
Jisoès aè ku riñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè ñwáè ce li rkoo li m kwe naè enáê, “Naèti mbekïì vú táá mbena.” E natïì a táá mbo.	"But he knew their thoughts; and he said to the man who had the withered hand, ""Rise up, and stand in the middle."" He arose and stood."
Wèr à zhe mkuu a bɛr mmee.	We ate beans and reserved yours.
AÈde' ñwáè lor mruâ' mfi foñ lá njep mñguèp mruè' vïû brúèú ka'. E ka' gee wa'a baná mruâ' mfi anaè mi be loè koo, to'shi mñguèp mruè' anaè, tá mruè' mi kúte aè nsheè tá ñguèp mruè' anaè bú aè cicïì.” Yi ke ba ená a lá mruâ' mfi ba njep mñguèp mruè' vïû bfi tá mi bo kúète ka', tá mñguèp mruè' vi to'ñger ka'.	"No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and the wine pours out, and the skins will be destroyed; but they put new wine into fresh wineskins."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè Jus magoèr se a loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a vú aè rcaè'ni Maataè ba Máèári njo' ndur yaèp ce e m kwe. Loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm du ba' aè rla' Bátanïì yi yu saèsap ka'. Yi ku ba aèmboè bkïìlomátaè vïû btaar wa'a.	Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen stadia away. Many of the Jews had joined the women around Martha and Mary, to console them concerning their brother.
Ŋkwaa à ràte, a tuu nje wàa rò.	The vine has crept and crossed the stream.
AÈde' aè laa wánáê, “Byee vi yu njo' rbúè, rbúè li ba njo' byee.” Ka' yi yu mini wa'a, Nyúè be geèe tá rbúè ba byee a lo mïì. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè nyor, Nyúè aè m geèe nyor tá beèe a bo loèr ce saèki aègho ka'. Nyúè aè m geèe nyor tá ñwáè bo geèe rfaè' aègho neè Tata Jisos Kraêis. Tata Jisos Kraâis aè ce keè'ni nyor anaè.	Foods for the belly, and the belly for foods, but God will bring to nothing both it and them. But the body is not for sexual immorality, but for the Lord; and the Lord for the body.
Wɛ̀ kaʼ ce no buu gòr banɛ à be lò bèti ba à yuu cicì.	If you drink a lot, then you will become something useless.
Kwaè'shi neè aèmboè ndeèe beèe Isráèl. E ke ba aè nfeè' beèe mo' efa woweèe a ce ye byee ce a tañshi tañshïì aègho neè Nyúè, a Nyúè weèe a ba ñwáè moè'sir.	Consider Israel according to the flesh. Don't those who eat the sacrifices participate in the altar?
Muu zhìi à m kwe, e jep wàwà.	His child died and he was totally confused.
Máè fa kúú neè weèe aèmboè yaè Ta aè m fa neè máè naè,	I confer on you a kingdom, even as my Father conferred on me,
Beâe aè ñgoâñ Gaèláshaè, weèe yu blúr a? Ñwáè ce e roè' weèe aè roè' nda? Mboè weèr aè m suñ weèe mbuèu efa rkwe Jisos Kraâis embe kïìntaa rara se a?	Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you not to obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was openly set forth among you as crucified?
Baná be keèe ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a fúú efa rkwe, tá njeñwáè ca ba ñgwa nda, aèmboè yi yu ená bfúr beèe nsaèamba ca wááwá a m ba bduu vi naè?”	"In the resurrection therefore, whose wife will she be of the seven? For they all had her."""
Bfúr waê, m ce laèa neè weèe ce weèe wááwá rïìñ mncir. Weèe rïìñ ená mncir vi túr ñger mbenduè ñwáè ba aè nfeè' ce ñgaèñ bii nteèe.	Or don't you know, brothers (for I speak to men who know the law), that the law has dominion over a man for as long as he lives?
Ca yu ba yuu ce Tata Nyúè aè laèa neè weèr enáê, ‘Máè geèe wáè, wáè ba rraa neè beèe enje jáá, tá aè bo ba nduunjïû rluèñ neè ñgoèñ wááwá.’ ”	"For so has the Lord commanded us, saying, 'I have set you as a light for the Gentiles, that you should bring salvation to the uttermost parts of the earth.'"""
E m laèa neè tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe ená a ke'ni Poêl, a ker laa ená a keè'ni wa'a, a gee tá e ce koo mbáp, ma'shi tá bkar vi a ce vúè ce jaè' ye neè buu.	He ordered the centurion that Paul should be kept in custody, and should have some privileges, and not to forbid any of his friends to serve him or to visit him.
tá bár beèe ce yu beèe enje jáèá ce máè geèe woweèe a ba yaè beèe a bo roèo Tataê.	That the rest of men may seek after the Lord; All the Gentiles who are called by my name, Says the Lord, who does all these things.
Yi yu yáánïì ená m tuusi ñwáè shañ ce máè buu efa rsañ, suñ yuu ce e geèe ka'.”	"For it seems to me unreasonable, in sending a prisoner, not to also specify the charges against him."""
A m loèr mmbañruè mo' beèe a mbaa ce a m bú' ncir, a ce duè aègho a Jisoès weèe tá a bo duè taa mbe kïìntaa.	There were also others, two criminals, led with him to be put to death.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Suñ ka máè láê, waè' ca yu mbaèa nsuu ce weèe aè mú fyeni naè a?” E beesïì enáê, “ÁÈno, a yi.”	"Peter answered her, ""Tell me whether you sold the land for so much."" She said, ""Yes, for so much."""
AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa, weèr aè fúú efa múè la' a ce du aèwaâa roè, a ce kwaè'shi ená weèr be yá dïì' rloo aèfo. Weèr aè ka' baè', a cu aè nsheè, a laa neè bbyeèñge ce a m vúè aè rgeèe rloo aèfo.	On the Sabbath day we went forth outside of the city by a riverside, where we supposed there was a place of prayer, and we sat down, and spoke to the women who had come together.
Ŋkʉʉ tʉr ŋger mbe ndùu běe à zhii toʼ.	A chief has authority over the people in his village.
Woweèe a ce ghaa, a co'ni wap bcáè' a ce maè'ri, ce dú'si nfúènfú mbekïì.	As they cried out, and threw off their cloaks, and threw dust into the air,
Ñkúú rïìñ buu ca. M ka' ce laèa neè ye m ker ce wáp yuu mo' ka'. Máè rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená e máñni mo' efa buu ca ka' njobeè' a m geèe vi ba aè bsúèti ka'.	For the king knows of these things, to whom also I speak freely. For I am persuaded that none of these things is hidden from him, for this has not been done in a corner.
Máè suñ weèe aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ na, weèe aè byemïì ka', m ka' suñ weèe aèmboè buu embe buèu, weèe gee wee ká ka' byemi?	If I told you earthly things and you don't believe, how will you believe if I tell you heavenly things?
Ka' seèe ce seèe ce ye efa byee anaè, seèe yu aèñgoo wa'a, ntu' bráâd ku ba moè'sir. Cena yi duèñshi ená seèe wááwá yu ñwáè moè'sir.	Because there is one loaf of bread, we, who are many, are one body; for we all partake of the one loaf of bread.
Yàa ma à ba tuu wɛ̀r kù Bàmɛndà, wɛ̀r à du a baʼ kǒo nèmootì.	My mother sent us to Bamenda, and we arrived there at noon.
A m caè'si luèr embe ncuâu rsheè. Jisoès aè ke' mbe buèu a laa enáê, “Taèr, m ce yoèñshi wáè njobeè' wáè yu' la rloo.	"So they took away the stone from the place where the dead man was lying. Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, ""Father, I thank you that you listened to me."
Yi ku ba foñ aèmboè a ke maè' ñgaèa ená ñwáè jáá byeê, ñwáè jáá kep naè.	For in this the saying is true, 'One sows, and another reaps.'
Rbyemïì li m geèe Sáèra ce e m ba ma nleeñwáè a caase efa rbi muu, aè lo a yeeti. Cena yi m ba wa'a njobeè' e m byemi ená Nyúè yu ñwáâ mini, e be geèe yuu ce e kaè'.	By faith, even Sarah herself received power to conceive, and she bore a child when she was past age, since she counted him faithful who had promised.
Abraèham aè m bi Aisïìk, Aisïìk aè bi Jakoèp, Jakoèp aè bi Judaè ba bfúr vi.	Abraham became the father of Isaac. Isaac became the father of Jacob. Jacob became the father of Judah and his brothers.
Weèe ce fyá' buu ba efa mmïìr. Ñwáè moè' aè ka' ce loèr yi tu ená ku ba ye ñwáè yïì Jisos Kraêis, ñwáè anaè a ba kwaè'shi nfeè' baa, rïìñ ená wer weèr foñ yu beèe vi Jisos Kraêis.	Do you look at things only as they appear in front of your face? If anyone trusts in himself that he is Christ's, let him consider this again with himself, that, even as he is Christ's, so also we are Christ's.
Fa mɛ̀ cece tɛ m tii rgbaŋ àgho.	Give me a piece of stick to remove a jigger with.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' koñ máè baná ñgaèñ be yu' wa blaèa. Yaè Ta be koèñ ye. Weèr yaè Ta be vúè cu weèr ñwáè anaè weèe.	"Jesus answered him, ""If a man loves me, he will keep my word. My Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our home with him."
Yèr tâ be dù rjɛ̀r.	Our father will go on a journey.
Weèe fa kuè rïìñ ba buu caè'caè' ka', weèe kani wee mnyor efa rgeèe yuu bebep. Weâe ce kani wee mnyor efa rgeèe yuu bebep, weèe táá tatap aè buu bboèñboñ anaè. Weâe ce táá tatap aè buu ca, weèe gee ba ñgeèe ce yi yu aèmboè yïû Nyúè.	and in knowledge, self-control; and in self-control patience; and in patience godliness;
Mbò wɛ ke zhe nyàa a?	Donʼt you eat meat?
Bèe a zhiʼni mbe ndàp.	The house is crowded with people.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈniyaès, Jisos Kraâis ce geèe tá aè bo luèñ; naèti mbekïì, kupshi wo bkuu.” E m naèti mbekïì njaè' moè'sir.	"Peter said to him, ""Aeneas, Jesus Christ heals you. Get up and make your bed!"" Immediately he arose."
A yu'shi blaâa Nyúè, a riñ ená vi ke leèe seê, a ker riñ foñ njáèá ñger ce yi be ba aè ñgoâñ fi ce yi bii ka' ba naè.	and tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the age to come,
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñgoèñ ca wááwá yu yi Nyúè, ker ba buu wááwá ce vi yu njo.”	"for ""the earth is the Lord's, and its fullness."""
Baná weèr ker ce yá beèe ba aè mmïìr, aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ke geèe naè ka'. Weèr aè m ce yá Kraâis wa'a aè nfeè' moè', aè ka' ba seè'ni na, weèr aè ker ce yá ye wa' ka'.	Therefore we know no one after the flesh from now on. Even though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now we know him so no more.
Beèe wááwá ce a m yu' nsuñ ce ñgaâa ncïìñ njeèe a m suñ na, a m báèáñger seê.	All who heard it wondered at the things which were spoken to them by the shepherds.
Mnoèñ ce a m ce ye bráâd ce a láè yes njo ka' vi ka' caèa, weèr aè niñ mbe keñ a loâ aè rla' Fileèpaêi, mnoèñ vi ka' baè' taê, weèr aè konïì woweèe aè rla' Trowaès, a cu aèfo aè mnoèñ saèambaê.	We sailed away from Philippi after the days of Unleavened Bread, and came to them at Troas in five days, where we stayed seven days.
Yuu goèr ce masaè e ke koèñ ese ñwáè rfaè' yi yu ená e ba mini neè ye.	Here, moreover, it is required of stewards, that they be found faithful.
Yi ka' tá ba wa' ka', baná weèe aè m duè ba aè ryá ká? Weèe aè m duè aè ryá ñwáè ce e suèsi nyor neè bcáè' yoèo a? Yi yu wa' ka'. Beèe ce a ke suèsi nyor neè bcáâ' bboèñboñ, ce ye rboèñ, a ke cu ba aè nto'.	But what did you go out to see? A man clothed in soft clothing? Behold, those who are gorgeously dressed, and live delicately, are in kings' courts.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “A máè nduunjïì, a máè mini, a máè ryoèñ. AÈde' ñwáè moè' du yá yaè Taê, ce e buu efa rcaèa njïì enjep máè ka'.	"Jesus said to him, ""I am the way, the truth, and the life. No one comes to the Father, except through me."
Loèr neè rluèñ tá li ba aèmboè rtaa ñwáè maè' bïìr wa'a. Loèr neè kaèafaè' ce aè fa ba Yú' Nyúè a fa neè weèe. Kaèafaè' ca yu blaâa Nyúè.	And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God;
Bèe a ke kupshi mnyʉ̀ moʼ nè mntaaŋguu.	People make some idols with wood.
Yuu entombïì ce weèe aè ba rïìñ boèñboñ yi yu ená be keè ba aè mnoèñ elúèsimbuèu tá beèe mo' a fúú aè múè beèe, ce geèe ba yuu ce a koèñ. Beèe ca a be keè vúèshi blaèa ce weèe ce feè'shi aèmboè Jisoès,	knowing this first, that in the last days mockers will come, walking after their own lusts,
Wáè fa ye ñger mbenduè beèe wááwá tá e bo fa ryoèñ ce nfeseè neè beèe wááwá ce wáè fa mba yeâ mmboè.	even as you gave him authority over all flesh, he will give eternal life to all whom you have given him.
Jisoès aè fyá' ye, a koñ ye. A laa neè ye enáê, “Yuu mo' yi báti ce aè túr aè rgeèe. Duè fyeni yoè buu wááwá, lor mbaèa efa gho gapshi neè ñgaâa fuèp, tá aè bo túr bkuè' mbe buèu. Wá geèe wa' wáá, aè vú fa máâ mbuèu.”	"Jesus looking at him loved him, and said to him, ""One thing you lack. Go, sell whatever you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me, taking up the cross."""
AÈmboè weèe ce geèe ñgeèe ce yi yu aèmboè yïû Nyúè, weèe gee yuu ce aède' weèe gee neè nfúr embe weâe ndap neè nfúr moè' foñ. Weâe ce geèe wa'a weèe túr ntee boèñboñ neè beèe wááwá.	and in godliness brotherly affection; and in brotherly affection, love.
Tɛɛsi muu mbee.	Wean the child.
E m ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yu' neè buu ce a suñ weèe boèñboñ. Nfeè' ce wáè feè' yuu njo, ku ba yïì ce Nyúè be keè feè' njo fa neè wáè, feè' caèase embo.	"He said to them, ""Take heed what you hear. With whatever measure you measure, it will be measured to you, and more will be given to you who hear."
M ce koèñ máná weèe riñ foñ yuu ce yi koni máè tá weèe bo rïìñ aèmboè m yu. Tikikoès be suñ weèe buu ca. E yu nfúr yïìseèe, seèe aè koñ ye seê. E yu ñwáè rfaè' ce e ce faè' neè Tata Jisoès neè mini-ñwáè.	But that you also may know my affairs, how I am doing, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful servant in the Lord, will make known to you all things;
E cu mʉnyaŋ, wowèe a ku vʉ a ciʼ ye mnsaʼ.	He was quiet and they just came and instigated a case against him.
E lii ŋkwaa nje ce.	He has tied the string around the tree.
Caè'ni neè Háèrodïìyoèn ce e yu ñwáè Jus aèmboè máè foñ naè. Caè'ni neè beèe embe ndaèp Naèkisoès ce yu beèe Tataê.	Greet Herodion, my kinsman. Greet them of the household of Narcissus, who are in the Lord.
Woweèe a m ce duè, a ce de' aèmboè buu ca wááwá ce vi m koni.	They talked with each other about all of these things which had happened.
Cáè' ce a m teni dïì' mo' embe Ndaèp Nyúè aègho yi m saè'ti tïìtïìyáá.	The sun was darkened, and the veil of the temple was torn in two.
Woweèe a be bú nfeseè, gaèpni a Tata Nyúè weèe, bá foèo efa yi ñger.	who will pay the penalty: eternal destruction from the face of the Lord and from the glory of his might,
Woweèe a ke bo' bbyepbkúú, ye yaèp buu wááwá, ce geèe mloo msaèsap aè rduèñshi beèe ená woweèe a rïìñ aè rloo seê. Yap ñgá' be keè ba goèr seê.”	"those who devour widows' houses, and for a pretense make long prayers. These will receive greater condemnation."""
A ke gùu ŋwaròŋ nè bèe msàambâ.	Nwarong is acquired with seventy people.
Wɛ̌ du baʼ àgee tàp, à fyɛʼ kùyɛɛ.	When you reach near the hut, look upwards.
Zhìi tâ à m kàka gòr a bʉʼ zhii lɛʼ.	His father worried too much and broke his calabash.
ce Dávïìd ce laèa yi mbe Ñwaè' Byáá enáê, ‘Tata Nyúè aè m laèa neè Tata yaè enáê, “Cu aè la rkoo maè',	"David himself says in the book of Psalms, 'The Lord said to my Lord, ""Sit at my right hand,"
Moè' efa woweèe aè co' saè', a tee tuè' maè' ese ñwáè ce e m ba ñkwaèa neè ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Yi gháá wa'a.”	A certain one of them struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
Bfee Pitaè vi ka' kúti mbo, e laa enáê, “Máè rïìñ seè'ni neè mini-ñwáè ená Tata aè tuusi yïì ncïìndap e fúr máè embaè mmbo Hároèd, a ker fúr máè efa ñgá' ce Jus a m ce keè' ená e ba koni máè.”	"When Peter had come to himself, he said, ""Now I truly know that the Lord has sent out his angel and delivered me out of the hand of Herod, and from everything the Jewish people were expecting."""
AÈmboè ñwáè ce e ká' weèe yu ñwáâ nrara na, baná weèe ba rara aè buu wááwá ce weèe ce geèe,	but just as he who called you is holy, you yourselves also be holy in all of your behavior;
m ce koosimnse seê, ntee yi ce yañ máè aè nfeè' wááwá,	that I have great sorrow and unceasing pain in my heart.
Fa geèe tá yuu ce yi yu boèñboñ neè wáè, yi kúti ba yuu ce beèe a be laèa bebep aègho ka'.	Then don't let your good be slandered,
Kibay zhi toʼ noŋ ce a be cu bʉbʉ.	The sub chief has declared when the chiefʼs death shall be observed.
E m geèe wa'a tá yuu ce ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa, yi bo ghááte njo. E m laèa enáê, “M be múè' ya cuèu, maè' mñgaèa. M be suñ buu ce Nyúè aè m súèti ese beèe káâ' aè nfeè' ce e m geèe ñgoèñ.”	"that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying, ""I will open my mouth in parables; I will utter things hidden from the foundation of the world."""
Weèr aè yu' blaâa Nyúè ce a feè'shi neè weèr aèmboè woweèe foñ a m yu' naè. Weèr aè yá werná blaâa Nyúè ce a m yu' anaè vi m túr sá' neè woweèe ka' njobeè' woweèe a m yu' wa'a, a byemi ka'.	For indeed we have had good news preached to us, even as they also did, but the word they heard didn't profit them, because it wasn't mixed with faith by those who heard.
Yeè buu aè búète, nsá' yi ye weèe bcáè' wááwá.	Your riches are corrupted and your garments are moth-eaten.
Ŋgàlaʼ tap sê, njobèʼ e m koo mbaa.	Ngala is very strong because he caught a leopard.
Woweèe a m loâ aè rla' Jáèrikuè a ce duè, beèe magoèr a ce duè a yeâ mbuèu.	As they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
E m duè a caa aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè ba Sïìlesïìyaè, a ka' ce caèa a ce fa ñger neè bcoêr.	He went through Syria and Cilicia, strengthening the assemblies.
Ŋkar zhìi kaʼ fa ye cɛ̀ʼ banɛ e lùŋ efa mbɛp.	If his friend gives him a dress therefore he is save from cold.
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ ená weèe riñ boèñboñ ená nsuñ mboèñmboñ ce máè m feè'shi neè weèe naè aè m ba nsuñ ñwáè ka'.	But I make known to you, brothers, concerning the Good News which was preached by me, that it is not according to man.
Seèe fa ce rúè'ñger aèmboè beèe mo' efa woweèe a m rúè'ñger naè ka'. Ncïìndap Nyúè ce e ke yúshi beèe naè aè m yúshi woweèe.	Neither grumble, as some of them also grumbled, and perished by the destroyer.
Woweèe a ka' yu' wa'a, a kwá' bluèr tá a bo túúshi ye aègho. Yi ka' ba wa'a, e bú a fúú yi yu embe Ndaèp Nyúè.	Therefore they took up stones to throw at him, but Jesus was hidden, and went out of the temple, having gone through the midst of them, and so passed by.
Weèe fa fa yeè njïì ka', táá neè njep yuu ce weèe aè byemi, riñ weená bfúr wee ce a yu aè bdïì' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na, a ce yá njáèá ñgá' ce weèe ce yá na.	Withstand him steadfast in your faith, knowing that your brothers who are in the world are undergoing the same sufferings.
“Ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená AÈnaèniyaès aè m ba aè rla' anaè, aè ba ñwáè ce e m ce láè mncir yáánïì seê. Jus aèfo wááwá a m ce laèa boèñboñ aèmboè ye seê.	One Ananias, a devout man according to the law, well reported of by all the Jews who lived in Damascus,
Naètanïìyáèl aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Wáè rïìñ máè aè njáâá ká?” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Tá Felep ka' ká' wáè, máè ba yá wáè aè nfeè' ce wáè ba cu njep mbuèu ce ce a too ená fik naè.”	"Nathanael said to him, ""How do you know me?"" Jesus answered him, ""Before Philip called you, when you were under the fig tree, I saw you."""
Suñ ka weèr. Ncir yi byemi ená seèe ma' mbaâa baèraè' neè ñkwe Rum káè seèe ma' ka' aè?”	"Is it lawful for us to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"""
Baná e boèñ neè weèe ce weèe aè byemi. AÈ ka' ba yi neè beèe ce a byemi ka', “Luèr ce ñgaâa mboo mndap a m maè', aè kúti ba luèr rbuu ndap.”	"For you who believe therefore is the honor, but for those who are disobedient, ""The stone which the builders rejected, has become the chief cornerstone,"""
Ñgaèpni yi ka' ba aè to', aède' to' anaè yi táá ka'.	If a kingdom is divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
A ka' maè'shi woweèe, woweèe a du a yá yaèp beèe a suñ woweèe buu wááwá ce beèe ce a m ba btu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba bleebeèe a m laèa neè woweèe.	Being let go, they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and the elders had said to them.
Weèe rïìñ ená Nyúè aè gee weèe aè fúú efa rkwe weèe Jisoès Kraâis weèe, baná weèe lá ntee ba aè buu embe buèu, mbe dïì' Jisos Kraâis yu, a cu aè rkoo maè' Nyúè.	If then you were raised together with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated on the right hand of God.
Woowèe a kòŋ à rdù kaʼ.	They donʼt like to go.
Kúr beèe ca a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu a ce ghaa a ce laèa enáê, “Yú neè ye!”	"for the multitude of the people followed after, crying out, ""Away with him!"""
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Wáè be riñ yuu ce m ce geèe seè'ni ka'. AÈ be loè rïìñ ba embenjïì.”	"Jesus answered him, ""You don't know what I am doing now, but you will understand later."""
Kúr beèe ce a m ba aèfo a m niñ njep múè mo, a baa Pol weèe foñ. Ñgaâa nsa' mnsa' a m shaèshi bcáè' efa nyoèr Pol ba Silaès, a laa ená a lip woweèe neè mbaèñ.	The multitude rose up together against them, and the magistrates tore their clothes off of them, and commanded them to be beaten with rods.
Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' buu ce máè laèa na, ke' gee vi ka', baná ñgaèñ yu aèmboè lúr ce e m baè'ri yïì ndap mbenduè nsaruñ,	Everyone who hears these words of mine, and doesn't do them will be like a foolish man, who built his house on the sand.
E ka' yá aèmboè Jisoès ce caèa, a laa enáê, “Yá neè muu njeèe Nyúè.”	"and he looked at Jesus as he walked, and said, ""Behold, the Lamb of God!"""
AÈde' ñwáè mboo mkïìñ lor mboo, gee yuu ce e koèñ aègho. AÈde' e lor mboo embe dïû' mo'sir boo mkïìñ aègho mmbaa, rmo' li boñ du misïî, rmo' li ku ba ba aè rkïìñ.	Or hasn't the potter a right over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel for honor, and another for dishonor?
Baná aède' seèe laa neè ntee-ñwáè enáê, “Nyúè yu ñwáè ce e ce jaè' máè, aède' ñwáè gee yuu mo' neè máè ka'.”	"So that with good courage we say, ""The Lord is my helper. I will not fear. What can man do to me?"""
Judaès ce e m fyeèni ye naè, ye ye aè m rïìñ dïì' anaè njobeè' Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a m ce duè mbe dïì' anaè cá'cá'.	Now Judas, who betrayed him, also knew the place, for Jesus often met there with his disciples.
Loo rtaa rli gwè.	Your cap has fallen.
Máè riñ yuu ce aède' máè m ba gee kuu yuu ce a m ce sár mnsár aètu mo naè ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè laa neè ye máná e be koèñ aè rduè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm duè sa' vi mnsa' aèfo lá?	Being perplexed how to inquire concerning these things, I asked whether he was willing to go to Jerusalem and there be judged concerning these matters.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná weèe fa ce sa' beèe tá nfeè' mnsa' ka' gháá ka'. Be ba aè noèñ ce Tata Jisoès aè kúti, tá e gee buu ce beèe a geèe aè túè'nji vi yááti aèwañ. E be keè geèe tá mkwaè'shïì beèe mi yááti aèwañ foñ. Yu aè noèñ anaè ce Nyúè be keè yoèñshi ñwáè wááwá aèmboè a ba yoèñshi.	Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord comes, who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and reveal the counsels of the hearts. Then each man will get his praise from God.
Woweèe a ka' duè baè' aè rla' Saèlamïìs, a fe'shi blaâa Nyúè aè mndap rloo Juês. Joân aè m ba a woweèe, tá e bo ce jaè' woweèe.	When they were at Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the Jewish synagogues. They had also John as their attendant.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ buu ce vi be koni ye wááwá. A ka' rïìñ wa'a, a fúú a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weâe roèo ba nda?”	"Jesus therefore, knowing all the things that were happening to him, went forth, and said to them, ""Who are you looking for?"""
Musïìs aè m sañ mbe ñwaè' mncir ená a ka' koo njeñwáè a mbañruèñwáè, a túúshïì neè bluèr e kweê. Wáè laèa yo wá ká?”	"Now in our law, Moses commanded us to stone such. What then do you say about her?"""
Mɛ̌ kwàʼ enɛ e be vʉ̀.	I am expect that he will come.
Geewa'a, yi ku ba aèmboè máè m suñ weèe naè, weèe aè yá máè neè me mmir a ke' byemi neè máè ka'.	But I told you that you have seen me, and yet you don't believe.
E m ker laa neè ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Yáê, a yoè ma na.” Káâ' aè nfeè' anaè, ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu aè lor yïì maê, a ye a du a ce cu a yeâ laè'.	"Then he said to the disciple, ""Behold, your mother!"" From that hour, the disciple took her to his own home."
Weèr aè ka' ce kwaè'shi wa'a, Lesaè ce e yu tu yïû goèr aè vúê, a koo ye ese weèr aè ñger,	nan
E ba ba mbǎa a yuʼ nè zhii tùʼ.	He was there and heard it himself.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe raèraâ Lávïì a ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì naè, e m fa mncir neè beâe aè to' Isráèl tá a bo rïìñ aè rloo neè ye. Rfaè' ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ca li m ka' ba ghááte aè rgeèe tá beèe a ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, mbuèu moè' aè m ba keèr ba ená seèe túr ñwáè tañshi tañshïì moè' ce e yu ba aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk ce e yu jáá efa Ároèn naè ka'.	Now if there was perfection through the Levitical priesthood (for under it the people have received the law), what further need was there for another priest to arise after the order of Melchizedek, and not be called after the order of Aaron?
Ku' beèe a du a yeâ mbuèu, a ka' baè' aèfo, e gee ñgaâa byañ a ke'seè.	Great multitudes followed him, and he healed them there.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè máè, m ka' cu mbe tunshe na m ku ce láè mmir ba mbenduè Jisos Kraâis. Máè ka' kwe, ba sá' neè máè.	For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
Wěr ke ye baa nfèʼsìp.	We eat fufu every day.
Saèkiyoès aè suu embe ce anaè cárcár, a koni ye neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	He hurried, came down, and received him joyfully.
Yïìseèe ta Abraèham ca yu taèr neè beèe wááwá ce a geèe búè, a ke' ku geèe ba búè caè'caè' ka', a ce jáèr njep mi mkuèu, a byemi aèmboè e m byemi tá a ka' keè geèe ye búè naè.	He is the father of circumcision to those who not only are of the circumcision, but who also walk in the steps of that faith of our father Abraham, which he had in uncircumcision.
A yaa cɛ̀ʼ na.	This is my cloth.
Ka' ba ená ñwáè rfaè' anaè yu ñwáâ mbembep, laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘Yi be loèr nfeè' seê, tá yaè masaè ka' vúè’,	But if that evil servant should say in his heart, 'My lord is delaying his coming,'
E ka' duè baè' mbe dïì' anaè, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loo neè, faè dïì' weèe gwe rmoèoshïì ka'.”	"When he was at the place, he said to them, ""Pray that you don't enter into temptation."""
Njeñwáè anaè aè natïì foñ a cañ a du aè ntee rïìñ faèdïì' ce Nyúè aè m kupshi neè ye, aè ba dïì' ce e be cu tá a ke'ni ye aè mnoèñ ncúèkïì neè mnoèñ mjeèe-mmbaa ba mnoèñ mntuunfu.	The woman fled into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared by God, that there they may nourish her one thousand two hundred sixty days.
A ka' geèe wa' wáá, e laa neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, ‘Máè fáèr buu ñkaè' a misïî, beèe ce máè be a ghááteè aè beèe ce a ba vúè ñkaè' anaè ka'.	"Then he said to his servants, 'The wedding is ready, but those who were invited weren't worthy.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	9	Duè neè aè btase, be ñwáè wááwá ce weèe aè ka' yá.’	Go therefore to the intersections of the highways, and as many as you may find, invite to the marriage feast.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	10	Ñgaâa mfaè' anaè a fúú a jár aè mnduunjïì, a vú neè beèe wááwá ce a m yá. Woweèe a m vúè neè beâe bbebep, ba beâe bboèñboñ, ndap ñkaè' aè ruu neè beèe.	Those servants went out into the highways, and gathered together as many as they found, both bad and good. The wedding was filled with guests.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	11	“Ñkúú aè ka' niñ mbe ndaèp aè ryá ñgaâa ñkaè' ce e m be naè, a yá ñwáè moè' mbo ce e m yar cáè' ñkaè' ka'.	But when the king came in to see the guests, he saw there a man who didn't have on wedding clothing,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	12	E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Ñkaraè, wáè yar cáè' ñkaè' ka', a gee wáká a ka' niñ taâa?’ Ñwáè anaè aè túr yuu laèa ka'.	and he said to him, 'Friend, how did you come in here not wearing wedding clothing?' He was speechless.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	13	Ñkúú aè laa neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, ‘Kur neè ye mkoo ba mkuèu ma' aè dïì' ce ku ba ba túè'nji. Beèe a be keèe ce warse ce kúr msoèñ aèfo.’	Then the king said to the servants, 'Bind him hand and foot, take him away, and throw him into the outer darkness; there is where the weeping and grinding of teeth will be.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	14	Yi yu ená Nyúè aè ká' beèe magoèr, a ce ce ba beèe múcaèr.”	For many are called, but few chosen."
A ka' baè' mbo, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce koèñ aè rgeèe tá beèe a loo neè Nyúè aè njáèá njïì ce ncir yi byemi ka'.”	"saying, ""This man persuades men to worship God contrary to the law."""
Ka' cu, a ku yu' aèmboè yuu mo' yi ce vúè embe buèu, a ce coèo aèmboè fu' tatap wa'a. Yi m ce coèo aè bdïì' wááwá embe ndaèp ce woweèe a m ba.	Suddenly there came from the sky a sound like the rushing of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.
E ker laa enáê, “A mbuèu ce máè m suñ weèe ená aède' ñwáè vú yá máè caa efa ená Taèr aè fa ye njïì ená e vú yá máè ka'.”	"He said, ""For this cause have I said to you that no one can come to me, unless it is given to him by my Father."""
Kúr beèe anaè a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè m yu' embe Ñwaè' Mncir ená Kraâis anaè be cu nfeseè. Wáè ka' ce laèa wáná a be naèa Muu Ñwáè mbekïì njoká? Muu Ñwáè anaè yu nda seê?”	"The multitude answered him, ""We have heard out of the law that the Christ remains forever. How do you say, 'The Son of Man must be lifted up?' Who is this Son of Man?"""
Woweèe a vú a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, weèr yi werná a wáè ñwáè mini ce wá ke loèr ñwáè moè' jáá ka'. Wá ke yá'ni nduunjïû Nyúè neè mini-ñwáè aèmboè yi yu. Suñ ka neè weèr láê, ncir yi byemi ená seèe ma' mbaâa baèraè' neè ñkwe Rum káè seèe ma' ka'?”	"When they had come, they asked him, ""Teacher, we know that you are honest, and don't defer to anyone; for you aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God. Is it lawful to pay taxes to Caesar, or not?"
“Má máè foñ aè m kwaè'shi máná máè ba geèe yuu wááwá ce aède' m geêe, aè rkani buu ce vi m ba kuu Jisoès aè rla' Nasaráèt.	"I myself most certainly thought that I ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	10	A yuu ce máè m geèe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Máè m loo njïì ese beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a du a fa beèe Nyúè magoèr se aè shañ. Beèe a ka' ce yúshi woweèe, máè byemïì foñ.	This I also did in Jerusalem. I both shut up many of the saints in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests, and when they were put to death I gave my vote against them.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	11	Máè m duè aè mndap mloo aè nfeè' aèñgoo aè rfa ñgá' neè woweèe, a gheter aè rgeèe tá woweèe a kani ená a be keèr byemi neè Jisos Kraâis ka'. Ntee yi m bep máè neè woweèe seê, máè du a fa ñgá' neè woweèe caar a ba' aè mlaâ' aè bto' mo'.	Punishing them often in all the synagogues, I tried to make them blaspheme. Being exceedingly enraged against them, I persecuted them even to foreign cities.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	12	“AÈ ka' keèr ba aè nfeè' moè', máè ker nati a ce duè aè rla' Daèmaskoès, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a sañ ñwaè' a fa máè ñger ená m du koo woweèe.	Whereupon as I traveled to Damascus with the authority and commission from the chief priests,"
E kur mɛ̀ kur mɛ̀ a kaʼ dû.	He has complied to go according to his wish.
njobeè' e koèñ yiseèe to' seê, a ba'ri ndap rloo neè weèr.”	"for he loves our nation, and he built our synagogue for us."""
E beesïì enáê, “Káè e yu ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep áè, káè e yu ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep ka' áè, máè rïìñ ya yu ka'. Yuu ce m rïìñ yi ku ba ba ená máè m feèp, a ce yá buu seè'ni.”	"He therefore answered, ""I don't know if he is a sinner. One thing I do know: that though I was blind, now I see."""
A mboè rlee ñwáè li yu wa'a foñ. Li yu múcaèr wa'a a túr ñger seê. Kuè kwa'shi ka neè foñ aèmboè mú rcuèñ mor li ke toèo ma koèp láê.	So the tongue is also a little member, and boasts great things. See how a small fire can spread to a large forest!
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' Listraè ce e m kepñger. E m ku ba wa'a ká' embe nfeè' ce a m bi ye. E m be jár ka'.	At Lystra a certain man sat, impotent in his feet, a cripple from his mother's womb, who never had walked.
M ce loo máná aè fúr woweèe enjep ñgoèñ ka'. M ce loo máná aè ke'ni woweèe faè dïì' Sataèn ce e yu ñwáâ mbebep gee yuu mo' neè woweèe ka'.	I pray not that you would take them from the world, but that you would keep them from the evil one.
E beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè ce a too ená Jisoès naè, aè topshi nshe a yo' máè nje mmïìr, a laa ená m du su'si mmir njep túâ Siloèm. Máè du a ka' suè'si mmir njo, a ká' a ce yá buu.”	"He answered, ""A man called Jesus made mud, anointed my eyes, and said to me, 'Go to the pool of Siloam, and wash.' So I went away and washed, and I received sight."""
Weèe ka' ce geèe ba njáèá ká, weèe gee neè ye ntee wááwá njobeè' weèe ce geèe yuu anaè ba neè ñwáè ka, weèe ce geèe ba neè Tata Jisoès.	And whatever you do, work heartily, as for the Lord, and not for men,
Ñgá' ce beèe magoèr efa weâe mú a fa neè ñgaèñ aè gháá.	Sufficient to such a one is this punishment which was inflicted by the many;
Cïìñ neè kúr njeâe Nyúè ce yi yu mba weâe mmboè naè, ciñ yi neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ ená weèe ciñ naè, ke' ba ba aèmboè a taèa lá weèe taèa wa' ka'. Weèe fa faè' njobeè' weèe aè roñ mbaèa ka', faè' neè ba njobeè' weèe ce lu'shi aè rfaè'.	Shepherd the flock of God which is among you, exercising the oversight, not under compulsion, but voluntarily, not for dishonest gain, but willingly;
Baná m ka' vúê, m fúú neè ye aèwañ, suñ ku' buu bbebep ce e laèa a kuu weèr. E ce sa' weèr neè bsaèrbuu-ñwáè. E geèe ca wa'a, yi gháá ye ka', e kani aè rkoni bfúr, a kani beèe ce a ce koèñ aè rgeèe wa'a foñ, a fúr woweèe embe coêr.	Therefore, if I come, I will call attention to his deeds which he does, unjustly accusing us with wicked words. Not content with this, neither does he himself receive the brothers, and those who would, he forbids and throws out of the assembly.
M ce loo máná Ta Nyúè, ba Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Beèe Farïìsi a m yu' aèmboè kúr beèe ca a ce cúèúni aèmboè Jisoès. Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe Farïìsi ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a tuu beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè ená a du koo ye.	The Pharisees heard the multitude murmuring these things concerning him, and the chief priests and the Pharisees sent officers to arrest him.
Fu' yi ke caèa, kashi aèmboè yi gwáá, aè yu' aèmboè yi coèo. Wáâ yu' wa', riñ faèdïì' yi loè káè faèdïì' ce yi ce duè ka'. Yi ku ba wa'a neè ñwáè ce Yú' yi bi ye.”	"The wind blows where it wants to, and you hear its sound, but don't know where it comes from and where it is going. So is everyone who is born of the Spirit."""
Nyaèa anaè aè m fa ñger ená a fa beèe wááwá ncoèo. Káè ñwáè aè m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr áè, káè e m ba ñwáâ ñká' áè, káè e m ba ñkwaèa káè muu áè, a m fa ye ncoèo. A m ka' tá fa ñwáè ncoèo ca aè rkoo maè' ka', a fa nje nsaèpsi.	He causes all, the small and the great, the rich and the poor, and the free and the slave, to be given marks on their right hands, or on their foreheads;
a vú aègho njep kañ, a fa neè muu anaè, e fa neè yïì maê.	and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the young lady; and the young lady gave it to her mother.
AÈmboè yi yu na, yuu ce weèr túr nje tuè yi yu ená weèr fa' tá nyor boñ ye, káè weèr cu neè nyor ca njep ñgoèñ na áè, káè weèr aè fúú enjo áè.	Therefore also we make it our aim, whether at home or absent, to be well pleasing to him.
Beèe a m ce ye buu, a ce no buu, mmbañruè a ce loèr bbyeèñge, bbyeèñge a ce duèse bguèu, ku ce geèe wa' caar a ba' nyúè ce Nowa aè m niñ mbe keñ, mdip mi ruu aè ñgoèñ a yúshi woweèe wááwá naè.	They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ship, and the flood came, and destroyed them all.
Ntàràŋ à faa.	The inside roof pole does not fit.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce laèa, a laa enáê, “Weèe ce fa njeñwáè ca ñgá' wa' njoká? E geèe ba yuu boèñboñ neè máè.	"However, knowing this, Jesus said to them, ""Why do you trouble the woman? Because she has done a good work for me."
Pitaè aè ka' laèa mïìsi, woweèe a ce beèe a mmbaa. A m ce Josáèf ce li rlii mo' li m ba ená Baèsabaès, rmo' li ba ená Jostoès, a ker ce Maètiyaès foñ.	They put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, m ce loèr la ryoèñ aèmboè ku' yuu mo' se ka', ku ba ba ená m du gee rfaè' ce Tata Jisoès aè m fa neè máè. Rfaè' anaè li yu ená m suñ beèe Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè ntee boèñboñ ce Nyúè túr neè beèe.	But these things don't count; nor do I hold my life dear to myself, so that I may finish my race with joy, and the ministry which I received from the Lord Jesus, to fully testify to the Good News of the grace of God.
Mú mnoèñ vi ka' tuuse, ñwáâ ñká' aè lor buu wááwá ce e m túr, a du aè to' mo' ce yi m ba aènjïìsaèp seê, a jarsi buu anaè aèfo aè buu bcicïì.	Not many days after, the younger son gathered all of this together and traveled into a far country. There he wasted his property with riotous living.
Mkaèñsïì mi gweñgeèr aè nsheè aèmboè piya ce fu' tatap yi ke caèa ceni embe ce mber naè wa'a.	The stars of the sky fell to the earth, like a fig tree dropping its unripe figs when it is shaken by a great wind.
Kʉʉsi zhii cɛ̀ʼ nè ye.	Return his cloth to him.
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Jus a m barsi bbyeèñge ñgaâa mlii ce a m ce loo neè Nyúè ker ba mmbañruè ce a m ba beâe bgoèrgoâr aè rla' anaè, woweèe a fa ñgá' neè Pol ba Baènabaès, a juu woweèe efa yap ñgoèñ.	But the Jews stirred up the devout and prominent women and the chief men of the city, and stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and threw them out of their borders.
Bkwaèa, yu'ni neè neè wee mmasaè enjep ñgoèñ na. Weèe fa kuè ce faè' ba aè nfeè' ce woweèe a ce yá weèe tá woweèe a bo yu' rboèñ neè weèe ka'. Faè' neè neè woweèe neè nteâe mo'sir njobeè' weèe ce wáp Tata Nyúè.	Servants, obey in all things those who are your masters according to the flesh, not just when they are looking, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m loèr Abraèham aèmboè ñwáâ nyáánïì naè, Abraèham aè m banïì geèe búè a? Yi yu wa' ka', aè m ba aè nfeè' anaè e be gee búè ka'.	How then was it counted? When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
E byemïì, a ká' a ce roèo nduunjïì aè rfyeèni Jisoès neè woweèe aè nfeè' ce beèe a yu aèfo ka'.	He consented, and sought an opportunity to deliver him to them in the absence of the multitude.
À kaʼ koŋ à rtʉr mbàa, banɛ à be fàʼ tatap.	If you want to be rich, then you should work hard.
E m feè'shi aè rlii Jisoès neè ntee-ñwáè. E m de' a Jus ce a m ce laèa li Greêk, a sár mnsár a woweèe. Woweèe a m ce roèo aè ryú ye.	preaching boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus. He spoke and disputed against the Hellenists, but they were seeking to kill him.
Nyúè aè m ye leè' ce ncoèo efa gho aè m ba búè ce Abraèham aè m geèe naè. Yi ka' ba wa'a, Abraèham aè bi Aisïìk, mnoèñ vi ka' ba waami, e gee ye búè. Aisïìk aè bi Jakoèp, Jakoèp aè bi btu mntáè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	He gave him the covenant of circumcision. So Abraham became the father of Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. Isaac became the father of Jacob, and Jacob became the father of the twelve patriarchs.
Baná wee weèe foñ aè ba yá wee mnyor aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger, yuu bebep yi ker ce geèe yuu mo' neè weèe ka', weèe aè ce cu seè'ni weèe Nyúè weèe njobeè' weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu aèbee.	Thus consider yourselves also to be dead to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, e be káè' entombïì yá ñgá' goèr seê, tá ñgúè beâe seè'ni na a kani ye.	But first, he must suffer many things and be rejected by this generation.
Muu njar Pol aè yu' mncúè ce woweèe a m cúè na, a du a niñ mbe barakïì a suñ Poêl.	But Paul's sister's son heard of their lying in wait, and he came and entered into the barracks and told Paul.
AÈ ce geèe búè aè rduèñshi ená aè yu ñwáè Nyúè. Búè ce aè ce geèe anaè be ba neè sá'-ñwáè, ce aè ka' ce láè mncir Nyúè. Wáè ka' ce bú' mncir Nyúè, baná yi yu seè'ni aèmboè wáè geèe lá búè ka' wa'a.	For circumcision indeed profits, if you are a doer of the law, but if you are a transgressor of the law, your circumcision has become uncircumcision.
Caè'ni neè OÈbanuès ce e ce faè' neè Jisos Kraâis aèmboè weèr ce faè' foñ naè, ba Sïìtakïìs ce e yu ñkaraè se naè.	Greet Urbanus, our fellow worker in Christ, and Stachys, my beloved.
Weèe fa maè'shi tá beèe a too weèe ená Rabaèi ka', njobeè' weèe túr ñwáè ryá'nïì moè'sir caè'caè'. Weèe yu ba bfúr.	But don't you be called 'Rabbi,' for one is your teacher, the Christ, and all of you are brothers.
Pailáèt aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “M taa ye mbe kïìntaa njoká? Yuu bebep ce ñwáè ca aè geèe seeseê, yu ba ká?” Woweèe a ku ce waani, a ce laèa enáê, “Taa lá ye mbe kïìntaa.”	"Pilate said to them, ""Why, what evil has he done?"" But they cried out exceedingly, ""Crucify him!"""
Máè yá neè mini-ñwáè aèmboè a ce jar neè yaè beèe aè to' Ijïìp, a yu' aèmboè woweèe a ce war, a suu tá m bo fúr woweèe efa ñgá'. Baná aè be tami nyor tá m tuu wáè aè to' Ijïìp.’	I have surely seen the affliction of my people that is in Egypt, and have heard their groaning. I have come down to deliver them. Now come, I will send you into Egypt.'
Yuu ce weèe aè m geèe njo' le rbyemïû neè Jisos Kraâis yi yu aèmboè tañshïì ce weèe aè geèe neè Nyúè. Máè ka' ba kwe, wa bláá vi misïì tañshïì anaè, m ku ce lu'shi lu'shi.	Yes, and if I am poured out on the sacrifice and service of your faith, I rejoice, and rejoice with you all.
Ñwáè ce e yu aè mñkúè, e fa keèr kúti aè rloèr yi cáè' ka' cañ ka'.	Let him who is in the field not return back to take his cloak.
Yïì ta ba yïì ma a m ce duè ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm njep feè' wááwá.	His parents went every year to Jerusalem at the feast of the Passover.
Pol aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Joân aè m ce baèptir beèe njobeè' woweèe a m kupse, a ma' yaèp buu bbebep.” E m ker ce suñ beèe ená woweèe a byemi neè ñwáè ce e be vúè embe yeâ njïì. Ñwáè ce e m ce laèa na aè m ba Jisoès.	"Paul said, ""John indeed baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in the one who would come after him, that is, in Jesus."""
Weèe ce kwaè'shi ená mñwáá vi báti kyeèe tá a ka' kep kwaa efa mñkúè. M ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe naa me mmir fyá' aè mñkúè. Kwaa aè baèñ, nfeè' rkep aè ce gháá.	Don't you say, 'There are yet four months until the harvest?' Behold, I tell you, lift up your eyes, and look at the fields, that they are white for harvest already.
Ntàʼtè à koo mɛ̀.	I was held back by business.
Pailáèt aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñkúú Jus a?” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “AÈ laèa yo cuèu.”	"Pilate asked him, ""Are you the King of the Jews?"" He answered, ""So you say."""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Laèa neè tá beèe ca a cu aè nsheè.” Mjáá mi m ba mbe dïì' anaè. Mmbañruè ce a m cute aè nsheè a m ba aèmboè ncúèkïì taê.	"Jesus said, ""Have the people sit down."" Now there was much grass in that place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand."
Woweèe a bááñgeèr seê, a yoñshi Nyúè, a ce wáp seê, a ce laèa enáê, “Weèr aè yá buu bghagha' ntïìni.”	"Amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God. They were filled with fear, saying, ""We have seen strange things today."""
Waè' Nyúè ku ba ba Nyúè Jus caè'caè' a? AÈmboè e yu Nyúè beèe enje jáá foñ a? ÁÈno, e yu Nyúè beèe enje jáá foñ,	Or is God the God of Jews only? Isn't he the God of Gentiles also? Yes, of Gentiles also,
Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e m baè'ri ndap neè ye aè m ba Solomúèn.	But Solomon built him a house.
Muu anà yu nɛŋ a?	It that child free of witchcraft?
Jisos Kraâis ku ba ntïìni aèmboè e mú ba neèñkuèr, kuè ba wa' foñ aèyaèñseè. AÈde' e kupseè aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, today, and forever.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Maè' neè rraa aè ñgúè' bo maè', weèe be koo yuu.” Woweèe a ma' rraa, a moo aè rsúèñ rraa enjep roè laèr, njobeè' nca yi m ba njep rraa anaè goèr seê.	"He said to them, ""Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and you will find some."" They cast it therefore, and now they weren't able to draw it in for the multitude of fish."
Weèr aè ka' yá keñ ce e m ce duè aè rla' Foènishaè, weèr aè niñ mbo a duê.	Having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, we went aboard, and set sail.
Beèe mo' efa weâr mú a ba du faèdïì' rsheè li yu, a ka' baè', a yá buu aè ku ba aèmboè bbyeèñge ca a suñ woweèe naè, a ke' yá ye ka'.”	"Some of us went to the tomb, and found it just like the women had said, but they didn't see him."""
Wèr à zhe ŋkeŋ tɛ wèr bo yɛ ŋwɛ̀ ce e ba zhɛɛ ntaʼ anà.	We have sworn so that we will see who stole that chair.
Máè m sañ yuu mo' neè coêr, geewa'a Daèyotráfáès ce e koèñ aè rba tu embe cor aè byemïì ka'.	I wrote to the assembly, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first among them, doesn't accept what we say.
tá weèe ker ba beèe Nyúè wááwá bo rïìñ ku' njáèá rkoèñnïì ce li báèr aè bke', a sap kuèyáá, a sap a ko' mbekïì, a coomi a caa ñger.	may be strengthened to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
Wáè ka' gee yuu bebep neè bfúr wo, tá yap ntee yi ce fa woweèe ñgá' wa'a, baná wáè geèe yuu bebep neè Jisos Kraêis.	Thus, sinning against the brothers, and wounding their conscience when it is weak, you sin against Christ.
Woweèe a ka' duè caèa rla' AÈmfipolïìs ba rla' AÈpoèlonïìyaè, a ba' aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè. Ndap rloo Jus aè m ba aèfo.	Now when they had passed through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica, where there was a Jewish synagogue.
M ce tuu wáè ená aè du mú' map mmir, gee tá woweèe a fúú efa túè'nji du aè rraa, lo enjeptii Sataèn du njeptii Nyúè, tá a bo foèosi woweèe efa yaèp buu bbebep, tá woweèe a koni dïì' aè múè beèe ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a ba brara njobeè' woweèe a byemi neè máè naè.’	to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in me.'
Máè laèa buu ca tá m bo jaè' weèe jaè'. Máè koèñ máná m lá weèe ba ntáèr mbenduè nyor ka'. Yuu máè koèñ yi yu ba ená weèe gee buu ce vi yu bboèñboñ a ba byáánïì tá yuu mo' yi bo ba ce aètaè yi jepsïì weèe efa rfaè' neè Tata ka'.	This I say for your own profit; not that I may ensnare you, but for that which is appropriate, and that you may attend to the Lord without distraction.
Weèe ce loèr beèe ce a loèr wap btu ená a yu ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès naè aè beèe ce a yuu jáá. Weèe aè ka' fe'ni máè weèr woweèe m kwa'shïì máná aède' m ba mbaè njïì ka'.	For I reckon that I am not at all behind the very best apostles.
Weèr yu aèmboè Musïìs ka'. Musïìs aè m ce loè cete vi bsii neè cáè' faè dïì' beèe Isráèl a bo yá aèmboè rraa efa yeâ bsii anaè li ce liiti ka'.	and not as Moses, who put a veil on his face, that the children of Israel wouldn't look steadfastly on the end of that which was passing away.
Jisoès a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a m loè a du aèwaâa rdip rgoèr. Beèe magoèr a du fa waâp mbuèu. AÈ m ba beâe aè ñgoâñ Galeèle ba Juèdiyaè,	Jesus withdrew to the sea with his disciples, and a great multitude followed him from Galilee, from Judea,
Nyúè aè m ye leè' a yïì beèe aè nfeè' entombïì, a gee mncir ce vi m ba aèmboè aède' woweèe a loo neè ye. Dïì' mo' yi m ba ce a m ce loo neè Nyúè mbo.	Now indeed even the first covenant had ordinances of divine service, and an earthly sanctuary.
Yeè ndeèe aè ba ba aèmbo yïì Jisos Kraêis.	Have this in your mind, which was also in Christ Jesus,
Woweèe a ka' yu' nlaèa ca a nati a duse moè'sir moè'sir. Bleebeèe a m duè entombïì neè bghaèrbeèe, a ma'shi Jisoès a njeñwáè anaè mbo.	They, when they heard it, being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one, beginning from the oldest, even to the last. Jesus was left alone with the woman where she was, in the middle.
Beèe ca wááwá a gaèpni buu moè' efa ku' yaèp buu ce a túr, a fa rfa aègho, ñgwañkúñwáè ca ce e túr yuu ka' aè lor mú yuu wááwá ce e túr, aè ba yïì ce yi ba jaè' ye, a fa.”	"for all these put in gifts for God from their abundance, but she, out of her poverty, put in all that she had to live on."""
Weèe fa geèe rloo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na aèmboè beèe moè' efa woweèe a m geèe naè ka'. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Beèe a m cu aè nsheè a ye byee, a no buu, a nati mbekïì a bii bii neè blañ.”	"Neither be idolaters, as some of them were. As it is written, ""The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play."""
AÈmboè yi yu wa' na, wáè ka' ce sa' nfúroè njoká? AÈ ce jaèasi nfúroè njoká? Seèe wááwá be keè táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè tá e sa' seèe.	But you, why do you judge your brother? Or you again, why do you despise your brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè vúè aè rkoo máè a túr bsaè' ba mmbaèñ aèmboè m yu lá nyáèá wa'a njoká?	"Jesus answered them, ""Have you come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs to seize me?"
Nyúè aè geèe Jisos Kraâis aè fúú efa rkwe. Bláá Jisoès a yuu ce yi m geèe leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye a ñwáè yi túr ñger nfeseè. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' rkwe Jisoès, Jisoès yu ñkúú gaèy ce e ce keè'ni yïì beèe.	Now may the God of peace, who brought again from the dead the great shepherd of the sheep with the blood of an eternal covenant, our Lord Jesus,
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu vi Joân ba beèe Farïìsi a ce jïì mdip, awá beèe a du a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñgaâa yá'nïì buu vi Joân ba vïû beèe Farïìsi a ke jïì mdip, wo a ke' jïì yap ka' njoká?”	"John's disciples and the Pharisees were fasting, and they came and asked him, ""Why do John's disciples and the disciples of the Pharisees fast, but your disciples don't fast?"""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená tá nduñgúp ka' toñ neètú' e ntïìni na, aè be kani ñkaèraè' taar ená aè rïìñ máè ka'.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Most certainly I tell you that tonight, before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times."""
“Weèe fa ce kwaè'shi ená máè m vúè ba neè cumúnyañ njep ñgoèñ na ka'. Máè m vúè ba neè cumúnyañ ka'. Máè m vúè ba neè kaèafaè'.	"Don't think that I came to send peace on the earth. I didn't come to send peace, but a sword.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	35	Máè m vúè tá m bo geèe tá ñgaèpni yi ba mbetar muu mbañruè a yïì taê, ba muunje a yïì maê, ba ñgwa muu a maluâ.	For I came to set a man at odds against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	36	Beèe ce a be baèa ñwáè be kuè ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp.	A man's foes will be those of his own household.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	37	“Ñwáè ce e ka' koñ yïì taê, káè yïì ma áè, caa máè, baná ñgaèñ aè ghááte aè rba yaè ñwáè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' koñ muu yïì, baná ñgaèñ aè ghááte aè rba yaè ñwáè ka'.	He who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who loves son or daughter more than me isn't worthy of me.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	38	Ñwáè ce e ka' tá loèr yi kïìntaa vúè fa máâ mbuèu ka', baná ñgaèñ aè ghááte aè rba yaè ñwáè ka'.	He who doesn't take his cross and follow after me, isn't worthy of me.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	39	Ñwáè ce e ka' ce roèo ba li ryoèñ, baná e be bá li. Ñwáè ce e ka' bá li ryoèñ njo' máè baná e be koni li.	He who seeks his life will lose it; and he who loses his life for my sake will find it.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	40	“Ñwáè ce e ka' koni weèe baná e koni máè. Ñwáè ce e ka' koni máè, baná e koni ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	41	Ñwáè ce e ka' koni ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè njobeè' ñwáè anaè yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè baná ñgaèñ be koni blaè' ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè. Ñwáè ce e ka' koni ñwáâ nyáánïì njobeè' ñwáè anaè yu ñwáâ nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, baná ñgaèñ be koni blaè' ñwáè ce e yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward. He who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man's reward.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	42	Ñwáè ce e ka' fa ndoñ mdip ce e ce fúte neè ñwáè moè' efa beâe bká'ká' ca njobeè' e yu ñwáè yá'ni yaè buu, m ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená aède' e bá vi blaè' ka'.”	Whoever gives one of these little ones just a cup of cold water to drink in the name of a disciple, most certainly I tell you he will in no way lose his reward."
Jisoès aè ka' yu', a laa neè Jairoès enáê, “Fa wáp ka', kuè byemi byemi, muu woè be luèñ.”	"But Jesus hearing it, answered him, ""Don't be afraid. Only believe, and she will be healed."""
Rgʉ̀ li bar nje rbì.	A fig-like tree has attached itself to a kola nut tree.
Tu yïû goèr yi koo ye aè rkoo, a ye a lá'sïì nyor, e bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Yuu ce wáâ roèo suñ máè yu ká?”	"The commanding officer took him by the hand, and going aside, asked him privately, ""What is it that you have to tell me?"""
Bàr anà zhi shaŋger sê.	That excreta is very rancid.
Taèr, wáè ce aè yu yáánïì, ñgoèñ yi rïìñ wáè ka' máè rïìñ ya yu wáè. Beèe ca a rïìñ ená wáè m tuu máè.	Righteous Father, the world hasn't known you, but I knew you; and these knew that you sent me.
Nyúè aè ka' ce coo, beèe wááwá ce yaèp beèe aè m ce yañ byañ njáèá jáá jáèá jáá a vúseè neè ñgaâa byañ anaè, e lá mi mmbo mbe waâp nduè, a gee woweèe a ke'seè.	When the sun was setting, all those who had any sick with various diseases brought them to him; and he laid his hands on every one of them, and healed them.
Beèe wááwá a m ce gú'shi neè nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè njobeè' e m fa ñger neè nyaèa moè' ca. Woweèe a m ce gú'shi neè nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè foñ, a ce laèa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' yu ce e túr ñger a caa nyaèa ca ka'. Ñwáè yu ce aède' a nyaèa ca a re bkoèr ka'.”	"They worshiped the dragon, because he gave his authority to the beast, and they worshiped the beast, saying, ""Who is like the beast? Who is able to make war with him?"""
M ce loo máná woweèe wááwá a ba ñwáè moè'sir, aèmboè wáâ Taèr, aè yu njep máè, máè ba njep wáè naè, tá woweèe a bo ba njep soè foñ, tá ñgoèñ ca yi bo byemi ená wáè m tuu máè.	that they may all be one; even as you, Father, are in me, and I in you, that they also may be one in us; that the world may believe that you sent me.
Laèa neè beèe ce a kuè' aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na ená woweèe a fa naèa tu káè láè mmir mbenduè bkuè' ka', njobeè' ñwáè moè' rïìñ aèyaèñseè ka'. Laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a lá map mmir ba mbenduè Nyúè ce e yu mmbo mntoo a ce fa seèe buu wááwá tá seèe bo yu' rboèñ aègho.	Charge those who are rich in this present world that they not be haughty, nor have their hope set on the uncertainty of riches, but on the living God, who richly provides us with everything to enjoy;
A mbuèu ce m ce koèñ ená m tuu ye tá e vú yá weèe, tá weèe bo lu'shi aè ryá ye tá ntee yi bo fúte máè foñ.	I have sent him therefore the more diligently, that, when you see him again, you may rejoice, and that I may be the less sorrowful.
A fa rla' ca ñgá' njobeè' li m fa mruè' saèkïì neè bto' enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá, bto' ca vi no a ce saèki foñ aèmboè rli. Bkúú wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na a m ce ká' rla' ca ená a woweèe a sakïî. Li m geèe ñgaâa ntaa enjep ñgoèñ na a túr mbaèa njobeè' li m ce yuu ku' buu ese woweèe tá e bo ye rboèñ aègho.”	"For all the nations have drunk of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality, the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality with her, and the merchants of the earth grew rich from the abundance of her luxury."""
Mɛ̌ bɛɛ wɛ̀ enɛ à fa kèr gèe yuu bebep kaʼ.	I am warning you that you should not do evil anymore.
a tuu woweèe ená woweèe a du yá Tataê, bipshi neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñwáè ce yi m ba ená e be vúè naè káè weèr cu ce ke' ba ñwáâ jáá?”	"John, calling to himself two of his disciples, sent them to Jesus, saying, ""Are you the one who is coming, or should we look for another?"""
Nyúè aè m laèa neè Musïìs enáê, “M be koosimnse neè ñwáè ce máè koèñ. Be kwaè'shi ba máè ñwáè ce m be geèe boèñboñ neè ye.”	"For he said to Moses, ""I will have mercy on whom I have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I have compassion."""
Weèr ce loo ená Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta ker ba Tata Jisoès, gee tá weèr koni fáñ vúè yá weèe.	Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you;
Ngwe ca à niŋ mbe ndàp à njɛ̌ɛkɛ?	How did this dog enter the house?
E m tuusi mbàa nè mɛ̀ enɛ m̀ fa nè ŋkar zhìi.	She sent money through me to give to her friend.
Bbyeèñge anaè a wáp seê, a búú btu njep nsheè. Beèe a mmbaa anaè a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce roèo ñwáâ nteèe aè múè bgúâú beèe njoká?	"Becoming terrified, they bowed their faces down to the earth. They said to them, ""Why do you seek the living among the dead?"
Yïì ma aè sheê, a laa enáê, “A be too ye ená Joân.”	"His mother answered, ""Not so; but he will be called John."""
Máè m yá máná njeñwáè anaè aè m no bláá beèe ce a m yúshi njobeè' woweèe a m ce laèa aèwañ ená woweèe a ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès naè. E m no, bláá anaè vi koo ye aèmboè mruè' mi ke koo ñwáè naè. Máè ka' yá wa'a, a bááñger seê.	I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus. When I saw her, I wondered with great amazement.
Seèe ku'si Nyúè! E túr ñger aè rgeèe tá weèe táá tatap, aèmboè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce laèa naè. Nsuñ ca a nsuñ ce m ce suñ aèmboè Jisos Kraêis, a ba nsuñ aèmboè buu ce vi m ba aè bsúèti ká' eluâuñgoèñ,	nan
Seèe aè ka' byemi yuu ce beèe a laèa, baná yïì ce aè laèa Nyúè yi caèa yïì anaè, njobeè' cena a yïì ce aè laèa Nyúè kuu muu yïì.	If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater; for this is God's testimony which he has testified concerning his Son.
AÈmboè beèe magoèr a ce yu' nyor neè buu enjep ñgoèñ na, baná má máè be yu' nyor foñ.	Seeing that many boast after the flesh, I will also boast.
“Ñwaè' ca aè sañ máâ Klaâdïìyoès Lesaè neè wáâ maèsaè Fálïìs ce aè yu govanoè. Máè caè'ni wáè.	"Claudius Lysias to the most excellent governor Felix: Greetings.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	23	27	Jus a m koo ñwáè ca a sáni yú. Máè ka' yu' máná e yu ñwáè enjeptii ñkúú aè to' Ruêm, máè lor wa bsoogáè a du aègho a fap ye ese woweèe.	This man was seized by the Jews, and was about to be killed by them, when I came with the soldiers and rescued him, having learned that he was a Roman."
Baná buu ca ce duèñshi ená mncir vi yu brara, buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè laèa vi ba brara a ba byáánïì, a boêñ.	Therefore the law indeed is holy, and the commandment holy, and righteous, and good.
Seèe ce yá buu seè'ni na laè'rïì laè'rïì. Be keè ba aè nfeè' moè' tá seèe yá vi boèñboñ. Seèe rïìñ buu aè bbábá' seè'ni na, be ba aè nfeè' anaè, tá seèe riñ buu wááwá aèmboè Nyúè ye ye aè rïìñ seèe naè.	For now we see in a mirror, dimly, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know fully, even as I was also fully known.
Ca aè m geèe Tata Nyúè, aè ba yuu báèá neè seèe.”m’	"This was from the Lord, it is marvelous in our eyes'?"""
Mgwañ mi boèñ. Geewa'a mi ka' cir, aède' weèe gee weeká mi ka' ker leêe? Baná weèe ba aèmboè mgwañ mleèelee. Cu neè neè rfúteè-ñwáè.”	"Salt is good, but if the salt has lost its saltiness, with what will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace with one another."""
Wèe à yɛ yèe a?	We have caught our sheep.
Beèe a vúshïì ye. E fúshïì woweèe wááwá njepmbeè, a lor tar muu ba ma muu, ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce a woweèe a m ba, a woweèe a du mbe dïì' ce muu anaè aè m noèñ.	They ridiculed him. But he, having put them all out, took the father of the child, her mother, and those who were with him, and went in where the child was lying.
E kúti nteèe, a nati mbekïì njaè' moè'sir. Jisoès aè laa ená a fa muu anaè yuu tá e ye.	Her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately. He commanded that something be given to her to eat.
Mɛ̀ dù ŋkar, a du a boŋ cɛ̀ʼ.	I went on a visit, and acquired a piece of cloth.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' weèe aè m ba beèe Nyúè ka', aè ka' ba seè'ni na, weèe aè ba beèe Nyúè. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè', Nyúè aè m koosimnse neè weèe ka', aè ka' ba seè'ni na, e koosimnse neè weèe.	who in time past were no people, but now are God's people, who had not obtained mercy, but now have obtained mercy.
Bèe a fòosi Nfò mbàa.	People have loaned Nfor some money.
Jisos Kraâis be geèe tá weèe túr ba ndeâe mboèñmboñ ce beèe a yá bo kuè'si Nyúè, keèr náèsi ye.	being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are through Jesus Christ, to the glory and praise of God.
Beèe magoâr aè ñgoèñ Saèmarïìyaè ce a m vúâ aè rla' Sikaè a m byemi neè Jisoès njobeè' njeñwáè anaè aè m laèa enáê, “E suñ máè buu wááwá ce máè m geèe.”	"From that city many of the Samaritans believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, ""He told me everything that I did."""
Ka' yi yu wa'a, máè yá máná ncir mo' jáá yi yu njep máâ bláá, a ce maè' bïìr a ncir enjep máâ ntee, a gee máè ba ñkwaèa neè ncir yuu bebep ce yi yu njep máâ bláá naè.	but I see a different law in my members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity under the law of sin which is in my members.
Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a fyá' keñ tá e bo niñ mbo faè dïì' ku' beèe anaè a bo fate ye ka'.	He spoke to his disciples that a little boat should stay near him because of the crowd, so that they wouldn't press on him.
Ŋgǎa mfàʼ a jìtinyor.	The workers have boycotted.
Nyamɛ̀, yuu anà à lòr mɛ̀ kaʼ.	Not me, I didnʼt take that thing.
Ñwáè aè ka' koñ Nyúè baná Nyúè rïìñ ye.	But if anyone loves God, the same is known by him.
Weèr ce faè' neè mer mmbo, ka' ce yeñger. Beèe a ce cáp weèr, weèr ce laèa yer neè woweèe ená Nyúè ghoni woweèe. Beèe a ce fa weèr ñgá' weèr ce kur ntee, ce laèa yuu ka.	We toil, working with our own hands. When people curse us, we bless. Being persecuted, we endure.
Ka' cu, AÈlajaè ba Musïìs a nyáá, a ce de' a Jisoès.	Elijah and Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.
Yi ku ba foñ ená nyor ce beèe a be keè fúú aègho efa rkwe be keè ba jáá. A ke tuñ ñwáè, nyor búteè. E fúú efa rkwe, yïì nyor anaè ker búte ka'.	So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption.
Bcoʼ bvisèe bvi yû?	Where are our rods?
Ñwáè ce e ka' koni muu ghaèrñwáè aèmboè ca a máâ rlii, baná ñgaèñ aè koni máè.	Whoever receives one such little child in my name receives me,
Ŋwɛ̀ ca a ŋwɛ̀nfuu, àdeʼ e yuʼ Limbùm kaʼ.	This man is an alien, he cannot understand Limbum.
Weèe fa geèe yuu njo' ñwáè ce roèo aè rcaèa ñwáè ka', káè njo' ñwáè ce koèñ aè rnaèa nyor ka'. Ñwáè wááwá lor yi tu njep nsheè, yá ená ñwáè moè' aè caèa ye.	doing nothing through rivalry or through conceit, but in humility, each counting others better than himself;
Beèe a be keè ce koèñni ka', túr ntee rfoèosïì ka', ce tee mnde' mbe tu beèe moè', geèe yuu ce yaèp nyor ce koèñ ená a geêe, ce geèe ñgeèe mnyaèa, koèñ buu bboèñboñ ka'.	without natural affection, unforgiving, slanderers, without self-control, fierce, no lovers of good,
Ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè Jus ghup yu ñwáè ce e yu wa'a ba enjep ntee, búâ mini yu ba yïì enjep ntee. Búè anaè yu ba rfaè' ce aè geèe ba Yú' Rara, a ke' ba yuu ce mncir vi ce laèa ka'. E ke vúse ba beèe vúse njáèá ñwáè anaè ka'. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e ke vúse njáèá ñwáè ca.	but he is a Jew who is one inwardly, and circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit not in the letter; whose praise is not from men, but from God.
Ñwáè moè' aè laa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, yoè ma ba bfúr wo a táá njepmbeè a ce roèo aè ryá wáè.”	"One said to him, ""Behold, your mother and your brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to you."""
Woweèe a fúú embe kansuèr a ce lu'shi ená Nyúè aè yá woweèe a ghááteè aè beèe ce aède' beèe a coosïì njo' rlii Jisoès.	They therefore departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer dishonor for Jesus' name.
Jisoès aè ker waa, a ma'shi li ryoèñ neè Nyúè.	Jesus cried again with a loud voice, and yielded up his spirit.
Woowèe a ce sʉsʉ yɛɛ.	They are humming the song.
Woweèe a m fuñ enáê, “Cena yu ba njeèndoñ Nyúè, a yïì ñwáè ka'.”	"The people shouted, ""The voice of a god, and not of a man!"""
Krïûspoès ce e m ba tu embe ndaèp rloo ba beèe wááwá embe yeâ ndaèp a m byemi neè Tata Nyúè. Beèe magoâr aè rla' Koreèn a m yu' yuu ce Pol aè m laèa neè woweèe, a byemi, a baptïìr woweèe.	Crispus, the ruler of the synagogue, believed in the Lord with all his house. Many of the Corinthians, when they heard, believed and were baptized.
A m loèr bluèr ce vi m ba jáá jáèá jáá, a túr mlii jáá jáèá jáá a boo kuèu ñka' anaè aègho. Bluèr anaè vi m ba ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú. Mlii efa gho mi m ba enáê: jaspaè, ba safáèr, ba agáèr, ba emáraèl,	The foundations of the city's wall were adorned with all kinds of precious stones. The first foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, chalcedony; the fourth, emerald;
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ kep nfee banɛ ŋgàŋ à tɛ̀ŋ e.	If someone has a break his leg, then the person is deformed.
Zhi ke ba àtɛ̀r à fʉr rjɛɛ e mbà teʼ kaʼ.	It is usually not easy to remove arrows from a quiver.
Woweèe a bááñgeèr se aè ryu' buu ce e m ce yá'ni, njobeè' vi blaèa vi m ba neè ñger-ñwáè seê.	and they were astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
Máè suñ weèe buu ca seè'ni tá vi ka' koni, vi loè koni naè, tá weèe bo byemi neè máè.	Now I have told you before it happens so that, when it happens, you may believe.
Nyúè aè ka' ce beèe, ker ghoni woweèe, aède' e ker kupse yi ntee ka'.	For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
Beâe aè rla' Jopaè wááwá a m yu', beèe magoèr efa waâp mú a byemïì neè Tata Jisoès.	And it became known throughout all Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
Torsi nsàràʼ nje ntoto mbaacɛ̀ʼ.	Pass the needle through the buttonhole.
Yú' Nyúè ba ñgwaguèu ce muu njeèe aè loèr a laèa enáê, “Vúè.” Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' blaèa ca baná ñgaèñ laa foñ enáê, “Vúè.” Ñwáè ce ntee mdip yi ka' ce luèu ye, e koñ ená e ba no mdip enjep rdip ce li ke fa ryoèñ, baná ñgaèñ vú no mdip anaè aè cicïì.	"The Spirit and the bride say, ""Come!"" He who hears, let him say, ""Come!"" He who is thirsty, let him come. He who desires, let him take the water of life freely."
Beèe magoèr a ka' yu' ená e duè aèfo, a du a yeâ mbuèu, e konïì woweèe, a suñ woweèe aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a gee beèe ce a m ce yañ a ke'seè.	But the multitudes, perceiving it, followed him. He welcomed them, and spoke to them of the Kingdom of God, and he cured those who needed healing.
Ce sañ máâ Pol neè ya bo, m be laè'. Baná m ker laèa yuu aèmboè rkaa ce wáè túr máè ka', rkaa ce yu ba yo tu nyor.	I, Paul, write this with my own hand: I will repay it (not to mention to you that you owe to me even your own self besides).
“Mncoèo vi be yááti mbe rlir nyúè, ba mbe ñwáá, ba mbe mkaèñsïì, tá mluè mi ba njep ñgoèñ na, tá bjep vi ba njo' rcoèo ce rdip rgoèr li be ce coèo, keèr ce bañti ce ko' mbekïì ce gweè.	There will be signs in the sun, moon, and stars; and on the earth anxiety of nations, in perplexity for the roaring of the sea and the waves;
E laa enáê, “Buu ce aède' beèe a riñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè ka' naè, Nyúè aè geèe weèe aè rïîñ. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe mo', a ce suñ woweèe buu ca ba aè mñgaèa tá woweèe a ce keè' ce yá ka', a ce yu'shi, ce yu' ka'.”	"He said, ""To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of God, but to the rest in parables; that 'seeing they may not see, and hearing they may not understand.'"
Ntee yi m yañ Hároèd neè beâe aè rla' Tayaè ba Sidoèn woweèe a natïì aèbee a du aè ryá ye. Woweèe a ka' duè baè', a loo Blaâstoès ce e m ba ncïìndap embe nto', a du a yá ñkúú a laa neè ye ená a woweèe a nashi buu, cu neè cumúnyañ- ñwáè. A m laèa wa'a njobeè' yap to' yi m ce koni byee ba ese to' yïû ñkúú anaè.	Now Herod was very angry with the people of Tyre and Sidon. They came with one accord to him, and, having made Blastus, the king's personal aide, their friend, they asked for peace, because their country depended on the king's country for food.
Njàmnsʉ̀ à cùʼŋger à mkʉ̀ʉ wɛɛ.	The vegetables have all perished in the farm.
Bfúr waê, yi ka' ba wa'a, aèmboè Nyúè aè koosimnse neè seèe na, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe fa weêe mnyor neè Nyúè aèmboè buu tañshïì ce vi yu bteèe, a ba brara, Nyúè aè ce yu' rboèñ aègho. A njáèá njïû yáánïì ce ñwáè aè ba loo neè Nyúè.	Therefore I urge you, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your spiritual service.
A m koo nyaèa ca ker ba ñwáè ce e m ce nya' mnde' ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè, aè ker ba ñwáè ce e m ce geèe buu bbáèá aè bsii nyaèa ca naè. E m geèe buu bbáèá anaè a bo' beèe ce a m fa woweèe ncoèo nyaèa ca, woweèe a ker ce gú'shi neè blañ nyaèa ca naè. A m koo nyaèa ca ba ñwáè mnde' ca a ma' woweèe bteèe njep ma mor ce mkaèñ mi ce she njo.	The beast was taken, and with him the false prophet who worked the signs in his sight, with which he deceived those who had received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image. These two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with sulfur.
Ŋgwe zhi ke koʼni ku ce ŋwɛɛ mbùu àmbò ŋwɛ̀ waʼa.	When dogs are mating, they twist their buttocks like people.
E be duèñshi weèe ma rum ndap embe ndap ce a baè'ri mbenduè ndap anaè, a kupshi boèñboñ seê. Fáèr neè byee ñkaè' mbo.”	"He will show you a large, furnished upper room. Make preparations there."""
Jisoès aè ka' laèa neè woweèe enáê, “A máè ye”, woweèe a kútïì njïìnjïì a gweñger aè nsheè.	"When therefore he said to them, ""I am he,"" they went backward, and fell to the ground."
M ka' ce sa' beèe, m sa' yáánïì njobeè' aède' m sa' neè ya tu ka'. M ce sa' aèbee weèr ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	Even if I do judge, my judgment is true, for I am not alone, but I am with the Father who sent me.
Ŋgwe à cìr mbàp.	The dog has scent a rat.
Ku' beèe ce a m ce duè entombïì, ker ba ku' beèe ce a m ce vúè embe yeâ njïì, a ká' a ce yoèp enáê, “Seèe ku'si Muu Dávïìd! Nyúè ghoni ñwáè ce e vúè aè rlii Tataê! Seèe ku'si Nyúè embe buèu!”	"The multitudes who went before him, and who followed kept shouting, ""Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!"""
Tata aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Co'ni blaba' njobeè' mbe dïì' aè táá anaè yu dïû' rara.	The Lord said to him, 'Take your sandals off of your feet, for the place where you stand is holy ground.
Ndeèe ce seèe aè ka' yá njáèá ñgá' ce Jisos Kraâis aè m yá, ka' ñgá' anaè aè ka' ba goèr se áè, baná a ndeèe ce seèe be koni ñger njo' ye.	For as the sufferings of Christ abound to us, even so our comfort also abounds through Christ.
Máè m rïìñ máná a ye Kraâis anaè ka'. Geewa'a, mbuèu ce máè m vúè ya ce baèptir beèe aè to' Isráèl aè m ba ená woweèe a bo rïìñ ye.”	"I didn't know him, but for this reason I came baptizing in water: that he would be revealed to Israel."""
Jǒn à m baptir Jisòs.	John baptised Jesus.
Rcu enjep ngòŋ rli yu nè ŋgɛʼ ŋwɛ̀.	Life in the world is full of trouble.
“Haba! AÈde' a ke' ba fyeèni mgúr ca aè bbaâa mbaâa btaar, loèr mbaèa efa gho fa neè ñgaâa fuèp ka' njoká?”	Why wasn't this ointment sold for three hundred denarii, and given to the poor?
Geèe yuu ce aède' aè gee neè yo maê, neè bbyeèñge ce a yu bleebeèe, gee yuu ce aède' aè gee neè bjar wo neè bbyeèñge ce a yu bleebeèe ka' naè. Cu weèe woweèe aè njïû yáánïì.	the elder women as mothers; the younger as sisters, in all purity.
Cena a nsuñ ce weèe aè m yu' efa rkáè' ená seèe koñni.	For this is the message which you heard from the beginning, that we should love one another;
Máè tuu Tikikoès aè rla' Áfásoès.	But I sent Tychicus to Ephesus.
e ma'shïì neè woweèe a cañ a du mbuèuriñ.	but he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked.
A ka' laèa wa'a, ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè túú ye neè yañ kaâñ moè'sir njobeè' e m kuè'si Nyúè ka'; mghoèghoè mi ye ye, e kweê.	Immediately an angel of the Lord struck him, because he didn't give God the glory, and he was eaten by worms and died.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce máè m ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè weèe, máè m bipshi blaè' efa gho ka'. Máè m suèusi yaè nyor njep nsheè tá m bo naèa weèe mbekïì. Waè' máè m geèe wa'a, aè ba ba yuu bebep a?	Or did I commit a sin in humbling myself that you might be exalted, because I preached to you God's Good News free of charge?
Túè' aè ka' raa, woweèe a ce duè, a ka' baè' aètútú, Pitaè aè ko' mbe tu ndap aèmboè aè nyúè ncoèp-baa wa'a, aè rgeèe rloo.	Now on the next day as they were on their journey, and got close to the city, Peter went up on the housetop to pray at about noon.
E ka' baè' aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, a du Jáèrusaláèm a ca'ni cor yïû aèfo, a nati a kúti aè rla' Antïìyoèk.	When he had landed at Caesarea, he went up and greeted the assembly, and went down to Antioch.
Seemoè' aè be ce naèa tu enáê, “A m faèrshi mmba' mo' tá a bo bar máè njo.”	"You will say then, ""Branches were broken off, that I might be grafted in."""
E m ker laa foñ enáê, “A máè na, máè tami nyor aè rgeèe buu wááwá ce wáâ koèñ ená m geêe.” E m laèa wa'a baná e siñsi btañshïû rúèú ca a kúúsi ba yïû fi.	"then he has said, ""Behold, I have come to do your will."" He takes away the first, that he may establish the second,"
Máè yá fuè ñwaè' mbaè bo maè' ñwáè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè' naè. A m sañ ñwaè' mbo mbeèp bsïìp, a kar aèmboè a ke kar rwaèa naè, a siñ bcuèu efa gho neè nlaèadoñ bdïì' saèambaê.	I saw, in the right hand of him who sat on the throne, a book written inside and outside, sealed shut with seven seals.
Beèe mo' a lo a koñ aè rkoo ye. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, ñwáè moè' aè m joèo ye neè bo ka'.	Some of them would have arrested him, but no one laid hands on him.
Seèe aè m bú' mncir Nyúè, seèe Nyúè weèe aè túr mnsa', Nyúè aè ca'sïì buu bbebep ca embe seâe tuè. E m caè'si wa'a, yi ba seè'ni ená e láè mbe tu Jisoès aè nfeè' ce a m taa ye mbe kïìntaa naè.	wiping out the handwriting in ordinances which was against us; and he has taken it out of the way, nailing it to the cross;
Geèe neè wa'a njobeè' njáèá beèe ca a ce faè' ba neè Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe ka', woweèe a ce geèe ba yuu ce yi boèñ woweèe. Woweèe a ce bu' cuèu neè blaèa ce vi boèñ a ce foo seê, a ce bo' beèe ce a máñni buu.	For those who are such don't serve our Lord, Jesus Christ, but their own belly; and by their smooth and flattering speech, they deceive the hearts of the innocent.
Kyèse mbàa moʼ mboo kaʼ fa nè ye.	Add more money to it before giving him.
Musïìs aè m fa ncir ená weèe ce gee búè. (Ke' ba ená a ye ce e m káè' ka', aè m káè' ba wee btaê.) Musïìs aè ka' láè ncir wa'a weèe aè lo a ce geèe búè nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè.	Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is of Moses, but of the fathers), and on the Sabbath you circumcise a boy.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè nca mo' ce weèe aè ku koo seè'ni naè, vú aègho.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Bring some of the fish which you have just caught."""
Baná weèe borni njáèá buu ce weèe aè m ce geèe aè nfeè' weèe aè m ce cu ba rcu enjep ñgoèñ na naè. Loèr neè buu anaè aèmboè buu ce vi kwe wa'a. Maè'shi neè bsaèkïì ba mká'ni, borni ñgeâe bebep wááwá, ba mkwaè'shïû mmbembep. Fa baèñ mmir aè buu ka', njobeè' aè ka' ce baèñ mmir aè buu baná wáè loèr buu anaè aèmboè yu Nyúè wa'a.	Put to death therefore your members which are on the earth: sexual immorality, uncleanness, depraved passion, evil desire, and covetousness, which is idolatry;
E m ker yá woweèe a ba jáá efa seèe ka'. E m geèe wap mntee vi ba brara foñ njo' lap rbyemïì.	He made no distinction between us and them, cleansing their hearts by faith.
Ka' ba ená m ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' ca wa'a, ntubo Nyúè ba njo, baná kúú Nyúè yi vúè neè weèe.	But if I by the finger of God cast out demons, then the Kingdom of God has come to you.
Woweèe a kur ye tá a bo lïìp, e laa neè ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe enáê, “Waè' ncir yi byemi ená a lip ñwáè Rum ce a be sa' yïì nsa' ka' a?”	"When they had tied him up with thongs, Paul asked the centurion who stood by, ""Is it lawful for you to scourge a man who is a Roman, and not found guilty?"""
E laa neè woweèe ená a fa duè suñ beèe ená e yu Muu Nyúè ka'.	and commanded them that they should not make him known:
Woowèe a niŋ mbe ndàp.	They have entered into the house.
Weèe ce beâe aè rla' Fileèpaêi, weèe ku riñ yáánïì ená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce máè m naètïû aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè a ká' a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ naè, cor moè' aè m ker ba ce weèr woweèe aè m ce tarte mmbo ker caa efa weèe ka'.	You yourselves also know, you Philippians, that in the beginning of the Good News, when I departed from Macedonia, no assembly shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving but you only.
M ka' tá rïìñ aè rlaèa yuu ka', m máñnïì yuu Nyúè ka'. Weèr aè geèe ca yi ba rara neè weèe aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá.	But though I am unskilled in speech, yet I am not unskilled in knowledge. No, in every way we have been revealed to you in all things.
Ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m laèa neè ye naè aè ka' duè, e ká' boo mfaè' embe yeâ ndaèp a baa ker ba ñwáè soogáè ce e m fa yïì nyor neè Nyúè, ce e m ba moè' efa beèe ce a m ce faè' neè ye.	When the angel who spoke to him had departed, Cornelius called two of his household servants and a devout soldier of those who waited on him continually.
Beèe a ce laèa buu bbebep neè weèr, weèr ce kúsi ba blaâa bboèñboñ neè woweèe. Beèe a ce loèr weèr aèmboè yuu cicïì ce ñgoèñ yi ker ce koèñ aè ryá ka'. A ku bii loèr weèr aèmboè bkuèp buu wa'a, vú ba' ntïìni.	Being defamed, we entreat. We are made as the filth of the world, the dirt wiped off by all, even until now.
Ka' yuu ce woweèe a m laèa foñ na yi m tarte a yi moè' ka'.	Even so, their testimony did not agree.
Woweèe a m suñ ñwáè ka', geewa'a, a ce tarni ená nfúú efa rkwe ca yu ba ká lá.	"They kept this saying to themselves, questioning what the ""rising from the dead"" meant."
Yi yu foñ ená aèmboè seèe Kraâis weèe aè kwe aèbee na, seèe aè byemi ená seèe be cu seèe Kraâis weèe foñ,	But if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him;
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, a be naèa máè mbekïì tá m súñ beèe wááwá aè yaè.”	"And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, will draw all people to myself."""
Tá beèe wááwá a bo yá rluèñ Nyúè.’ ”	"All flesh will see God's salvation.'"""
Wáè ba koni máè a baa máè nje nyoèr ka', ká' embe nfeè' máè ba niñ mbe ndaèp na njeñwáè ca aè be borni efa rnyoè'shi máè mkuèu ka'.	You gave me no kiss, but she, since the time I came in, has not ceased to kiss my feet.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená masaè anaè be fa yïì buu wááwá mbe yeâ mmboè.	Most certainly I tell you that he will set him over all that he has.
Fa gèe mcɛ̌r wèe ŋgwe anà kaʼ.	Donʼt play with that dog.
Máè ker yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè'. AÈ m ba ncïìndap Nyúè ce e ke toèo mor mbe dïì' ce a ke fa rfa neè Nyúè. E vú embe dïì' rfa anaè a waa, a laa neè ncïìndap Nyúè moè' ca enáê, “Yáê, gráâp aè baèñ. Loèr yoè saè' anaè du ceni efa mñkwaa enjep ñgoèñ na.”	"Another angel came out from the altar, he who has power over fire, and he called with a great voice to him who had the sharp sickle, saying, ""Send forth your sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the vine of the earth, for the earth's grapes are fully ripe!"""
Ñwáâ ñgoâr aè rla' anaè aè m túr ñkúè aètútú. A m ce too ye ená Puèbilïìyoès. E m koni weèr, a nyañ weèr boèñboñ se aè mnoâñ btaar.	Now in the neighborhood of that place were lands belonging to the chief man of the island, named Publius, who received us, and courteously entertained us for three days.
Mmbañruè, koèñ neè wee bbyeèñge aèmboè Kraâis ye ye aè m koèñ coêr, a fa yi tu aètu mo naè,	Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ also loved the assembly, and gave himself up for it;
Saimún Pitaè aè kútïì mbe keñ a súñ rraa a fúr mbe ñkúè. Nca goèrgoèr yi m ba njo seê. Yi m ba rjeèe neè ncoèp-taar-aè-mntaê. Ka' nca yi m ba njo goèr wa'a, rraa li m ceeñger ka'.	Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of great fish, one hundred fifty-three; and even though there were so many, the net wasn't torn.
Ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè laa neè Felep enáê, “Naèti du mbaè mbuèuñgoèñ, njep nduunjïì ce yi loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a du aè rla' Gaasaè.” Yu nduunjïì ce yi yu aè rïìñ.	"But an angel of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, ""Arise, and go toward the south to the way that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desert."""
E lip ye à ntàr.	He has beaten him out wickedness.
njobeè' aède' woweèe a ker kweñger ka'. Woweèe a be keè ba aèmboè bcïìndap Nyúè wa'a. Woweèe a be keè ba boo Nyúè njobeè' woweèe a fúú efa rkwe.	For they can't die any more, for they are like the angels, and are children of God, being children of the resurrection.
Muu anaè be keè ba ñwáâ ñgoèr, tá a too ye ená Muu Nyúè embe buèu. Tata Nyúè be fa kúú yïì ta Dávïìd neè ye.	He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High. The Lord God will give him the throne of his father, David,
Jisoès aè laa neè njeñwáè anaè enáê, “Lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè ke'seè, duè yo yu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.”	"He said to the woman, ""Your faith has saved you. Go in peace."""
E be bi muu mbañruè tá aè fa li rlii ená Jisoès, njobeè' e be geèe tá yïì beèe a luñ efa yaèp buu bbebep.”	"She shall bring forth a son. You shall call his name Jesus, for it is he who shall save his people from their sins."""
M ce loo máná Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
E m ker ma' ñgaèa moè' neè woweèe enáê, “Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè yis ce njeñwáè aè m loèr, a fe' mkúâñ bráâd mñkaâa btaar, a top aègho caar mkúèñ anaè mi ko'.”	"He spoke another parable to them. ""The Kingdom of Heaven is like yeast, which a woman took, and hid in three measures of meal, until it was all leavened."""
Máè ka' loâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a du aè bdïì' mo' aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè ba aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè.	Then I came to the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
Rkìŋ rlisò rli bʉʼtî.	Our pot is broken.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mbañruèñwáè ce e fa kwaèñ neè muunje, mbañruèñwáè anaè ka' yá ená e be loèr muunje ca ka' njobeè' e koèñ aè rcu ñkúè tá e bo faè' neè Nyúè boèñboñ, yi bep ka'. E ka' moo aè rcu laèr njo' ntee njeñwáè yi ce loè ye, e ka' koñ e lor ñgwa yïì. E ka' gee wa'a, baná e geèe yuu bebep ka'.	But if any man thinks that he is behaving inappropriately toward his virgin, if she is past the flower of her age, and if need so requires, let him do what he desires. He doesn't sin. Let them marry.
Buu vi btaar anaè yu Yú' ba mdip, ker ba bláá. Buu ca vi ce laèa yuu yi mo'sir.	the Spirit, the water, and the blood; and the three agree as one.
Baná seèe fúú efa múè rla' du yá ye tá a coosi seèe woweèe aèbee,	Let us therefore go out to him outside of the camp, bearing his reproach.
Felep aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, duèñshi weèr yoè Ta tá yi bo ghááte weèr.”	"Philip said to him, ""Lord, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us."""
M ce loo máná aèmboè weèe be ce yá'ni, rïìñ Nyúè boèñboñ, tá Nyúè túr ntee boèñboñ neè weèe, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
Woweèe a bipshïì neè yi enáê, “Ñwáè anaè yuê?” E beesïì enáê, “M rïìñ faèdïì' e yu ka'.”	"Then they asked him, ""Where is he?"" He said, ""I don't know."""
Ñkúú ba govanoè ba Báènïîs, ker ba bár beèe wááwá a natïì mbekïì.	The king rose up with the governor, and Bernice, and those who sat with them.
Weèr ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè ñgaâa cor ce a yu aè rla' Koreèn ce a Jisoès weèe a yu aè ñwáè moè'sir. Nyúè aè ce weèe efa múè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na tá weèe ba yïì beèe. Weèe yu aèbee weèe beèe Nyúè ce a yu aè bdïì' wááwá a ce loo neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis. E yu Tata neè woweèe aèmboè e yu neè seèe naè.	to the assembly of God which is at Corinth; those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be saints, with all who call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ in every place, both theirs and ours:
Mmbañruè wááwá ce a m ye, a m ba aèmboè beèe ncúèkïì taê, ka' lor bbyeèñge ba bghaèrbeèe.	Those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
Zhi yu ghup a?	Is it true?
Luèr anaè aè m kuè' seê. Woweèe a ka' vúè baè' aèfo, a yá ená a ba biñsi luèr anaè embe nduè ncuèu rsheè wáá.	for it was very big. Looking up, they saw that the stone was rolled back.
Fálïìs ce e m rïìñ nduunjïì anaè boèñboñ seê, aè ku' mnsa', a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Lesaè ce e yu tu yïû goèr neè bsoogáè naè aè ka' vúê, m ka' teni wee mnsa' ca.”	"But Felix, having more exact knowledge concerning the Way, deferred them, saying, ""When Lysias, the commanding officer, comes down, I will decide your case."""
Jisoès aè ká' woweèe a laa buu neè woweèe aè mñgaèa enáê, “AÈde' Sataèn fúr Sataèn enjep ñwáè aè njáâá ká?	"He summoned them, and said to them in parables, ""How can Satan cast out Satan?"
Felep ye ye aè m yá Naètanïìyáèl a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè yá ñwáè ce Musïìs aè m sañ aèmboè ye mbe ñwaè' mncir, ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a ker sañ aèmboè ye foñ naè. A ye Jisoès muu Josáèf ce aè rla' Nasaráèt.”	"Philip found Nathanael, and said to him, ""We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, wrote: Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph."""
Mɛ̀ kaʼ yɛ ye, ku ba enɛ mɛ̀ yɛ nfʉr zhìi.	If I see him, therefore I have seen his brother.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “A ke yu'ni neè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè bdïì' wááwá, geewa'a beèe efa yeâ laè', ba yïì ndap, a ke yu'ni neè ye ka'.”	"Jesus said to them, ""A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and among his own relatives, and in his own house."""
Judaès ba Silaès ce a m ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè foñ, a m laèa buu goèr se aè rfa woweèe ñger tá woweèe a bo tap.	Judas and Silas, also being prophets themselves, encouraged the brothers with many words, and strengthened them.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Nyúè aè ka' ba ba yeè Taê, weèe aè ba koèñ máè njobeè' máè loè ese Nyúè a ka' vú aèfa. Máè vúè ba aè ya ñger ka'; máè vúè ba aè ñger ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	"Therefore Jesus said to them, ""If God were your father, you would love me, for I came out and have come from God. For I haven't come of myself, but he sent me."
Geewa'a, ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbaèa njobeè' weèe aè yu' le rboèñ wáá.	"But woe to you who are rich! For you have received your consolation.
Luke	Luêk	6	25	Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe ce ye seè'ni na a ce yu', njobeè' njeè be keè yañ weèe. Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe ce vúèshi seè'ni na, weèe be keè koosimnse ce warse.	Woe to you, you who are full now, for you will be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, for you will mourn and weep.
Luke	Luêk	6	26	Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce beèe wááwá a ku ce suñ ba buu bboèñboñ aèmboè weèe. Waêp btarkú a m ku gee neè beèe ce a m ce nya' mnde' ená a woweèe ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè naè wa' foñ.	Woe, when men speak well of you, for their fathers did the same thing to the false prophets.
Luke	Luêk	6	27	“AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe ce weèe ce yu' yuu ce m ce laèa, koèñ neè beèe ce a baèa weèe, gee buu bboèñboñ neè woweèe.	But I tell you who hear: love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,"
Nfɛ̀r yuu bòŋ nè ntambʉ.	Work is good with seriousness.
Muu ce e vʉ̀ mbena ntìni nà ce bèrep gòr.	That child who came here today behaves in a very fishy manner.
Jisoès aè laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Kúsi kaèafaè' mbaè ruèu. M fa no njep ndoñ ce Taèr aè fa neè máè na ka' a?”	"Jesus therefore said to Peter, ""Put the sword into its sheath. The cup which the Father has given me, shall I not surely drink it?"""
Solomúèn aè bi Rábuèwaèm, Rábuèwaèm aè bi AÈbijaè, AÈbijaè aè bi Asaè.	Solomon became the father of Rehoboam. Rehoboam became the father of Abijah. Abijah became the father of Asa.
AÈ sañ máâ Poêl, a sañ rcaè'ni ca neè ya bo. Kuushi neè yaè ñgá' ce m ce yá mbe shañ. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The salutation of me, Paul, with my own hand: remember my bonds. Grace be with you. Amen.
Pailáèt aè m sañ ñwaè' foñ a taa mbe tu kïìntaa. E m sañ enáê, “Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt, ñkúú Juês.”	"Pilate wrote a title also, and put it on the cross. There was written, ""JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS."""
Geèe neè wa'a neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè ba ryu'nïì, lá ye ntee rara, tá beèe a ka' ce cáp weèe, tá rïìtu yi bo koo woweèe njo' wap blaâa bbebep ce a ce laèa njo' ye ñgeâe boèñboñ ce weèe ce geèe njo' weèe yu beèe Jisos Kraêis.	having a good conscience; that, while you are spoken against as evildoers, they may be disappointed who curse your good way of life in Christ.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Haba! Wá wáè foñ yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a? Wáè ka' fyá' mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè aè yá ená ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè be vúâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle ka'.”	"They answered him, ""Are you also from Galilee? Search, and see that no prophet has arisen out of Galilee."""
Kuushi neè yuu ce máè m suñ weèe ená aède' ñwáè rfaè' caa yïì masaè ka' naè. Woweèe a m ka' ba fa máè ñgá', baná a be fa weèe ñgá' foñ. Woweèe a m ka' ba yu'ni neè wa blaèa baná a be yu'ni neè wee blaèa foñ.	Remember the word that I said to you: 'A servant is not greater than his lord.' If they persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená beèe mo' a yu aè múè beèe ce a tááte na ce rkwe li be joèo woweèe ka'. Woweèe a be kuè cu caar yá kúú Nyúè aèmboè yi vúè neè ñger-ñwáè.”	"He said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you, there are some standing here who will in no way taste death until they see the Kingdom of God come with power."""
M ker ce suñ weèe máná yi yu aètáèr neè kaèmál aè rtose njep rlir nsaèraè' neè ñwáè mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	"Again I tell you, it is easier for a camel to go through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God."""
Waa bcɛ̀ʼ bvi sii banɛ m̀ be yar kaʼ.	My clothes are dirty, therefore I will not wear them.
Woweèe a baèa Nyúè, a ce nyúè' beèe, a ce naèa tu, a ce yu' nyor, a ce kwaè'shi mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá ce aède' woweèe a gee buu bbebep. Woweèe a ce yu'ni neè wap mma ba wap bta ka'.	backbiters, hateful to God, insolent, haughty, boastful, inventors of evil things, disobedient to parents,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Weèe fa laèa ená ñgaèñ borni ka' njobeè' ñwáè ce e ka' ba yeè ñwáè bbaèa ka', baná ñgaèñ yu yeè ñwáè.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Don't forbid him, for he who is not against us is for us."""
a duê, a bu' mmbo neè woweèe, a fúr woweèe embe shañ, a laa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fúú efa lap rla' duê.	and they came and begged them. When they had brought them out, they asked them to depart from the city.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè aèmboè ñgá' ca ená ká? A sañ mbo enáê, “Juèu njeñwáè ce e yu ñkwaèa naè a muu yïì bsïìp. Yi yu boèñboñ ená muu ñkwaèa anaè ye bti' a muu njeñwáè ce e yu ñkwaèa ka' naè ka'.”	"However what does the Scripture say? ""Throw out the handmaid and her son, for the son of the handmaid will not inherit with the son of the free woman."""
M ka' ba ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' anaè ba aè ñger Básábuèl, baná beèe wee a ce fúr yap byú' anaè enjep beèe ba aè ñger nda? Baná be kuè sa' ba yeè beèe sa' weèe.	If I by Beelzebul cast out demons, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore they will be your judges.
E ku du kù Bàmendà kàŋ moʼsir.	He has only gone to Bamenda one time.
E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a cáp ye a laa enáê, “A wáè ñwáè ce aè yu ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu, weèr yu yer ñgaâa yá'ni buu Musïìs.	"They insulted him and said, ""You are his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses."
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Máè geèe wáè ba taèr neè bto' magoèr” naè. Baná aè bsii Nyúè, Abraèham yu taèr neè seèe. Yu ye ce Abraèham aè m byemi neè ye naè. Yu ye Nyúè ce e ke geèe beèe ce a kweñger, a kútïì bteèe. Yu ye ce e ke laèa, yuu ce yi m be ba ka', yi ku ba.	"As it is written, ""I have made you a father of many nations."" This is in the presence of him whom he believed: God, who gives life to the dead, and calls the things that are not, as though they were."
Nwaʼ zhi yu mbe ndùu tɛbùr.	The book is on the table.
Geewa'a, e koo ye aè boè, a laa enáê, “Naèti mbekïì, muu.”	"But he put them all outside, and taking her by the hand, he called, saying, ""Child, arise!"""
Njɛ̀ɛbtaŋ [njɛ̀ː-btāŋ] cn 1a.	one of the clans of Mbum tribe; Tang clan.
beèe a mmbaa anaè a ka' yu' aèmboè Joân aè laèa wa'a, a nati a du aèmbuèu Jisoès.	The two disciples heard him speak, and they followed Jesus.
Njar yàa yu ŋwɛ̀ mbàa.	My sister is a rich person.
Nfeè' tee msini aè ka' gháá, e tuu ñwáè rfaè' ená e du yá beèe anaè, koo msini mi. Beèe anaè a koo ñwáè anaè, a lïîp, a kúsi ye njïìnjïì, e du mboèmmbo.	At the proper season, he sent a servant to the farmers to collect his share of the fruit of the vineyard. But the farmers beat him, and sent him away empty.
tá e du aè bto' ce vi yu aè mmbuu ñgoèñ wááwá, bo' bto' anaè. A too bto' anaè ená Gok ba Magoèk. E be vúè neè bto' ca aèbee tá vi bo maè' bïìr. Ñgaâa maè' bïìr anaè a be ba goèr aèmboè nsaruñ wa'a.	and he will come out to deceive the nations which are in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the war; the number of whom is as the sand of the sea.
a gee e túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá foñ.” AÈmboè e túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá wa'a, baná yuu mo' yi yu ce e be buu efa rtúr ñger mbenduè mo ka'. AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' e seè'ni na, seèe aè ke' be yá ne aèmboè ñwáè túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá ka'.	"You have put all things in subjection under his feet."" For in that he subjected all things to him, he left nothing that is not subject to him. But now we don't see all things subjected to him, yet."
Koosi neè mnse neè beèe ce a ce tarni, nashi woweèe.	On some have compassion, making a distinction,
Ca yi m koni nfeè' taar, a lor yuu anaè njaè' moè'sir, a kúti aègho mbe buèu.	This was done three times, and immediately the vessel was received up into heaven.
Sáèrobabáèr aè bi AÈbiyuèr, AÈbiyuèr aè bi Álayikïìm, Álayikïìm aè bi Asoèr.	Zerubbabel became the father of Abiud. Abiud became the father of Eliakim. Eliakim became the father of Azor.
Bkar waê, ñwáè fa kúsi mcucu' ka', maè'shi yïì anaè ba neè rshentee Nyúè. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e be kúsi mcucu' yu máè. M be laè' woweèe. Cena ce laèa Tata Nyúè.”	"Don't seek revenge yourselves, beloved, but give place to God's wrath. For it is written, ""Vengeance belongs to me; I will repay, says the Lord."""
Nyúè aè báá woweèe aè rlo ená a fa kúti caèa yá Hároèd ka'. Woweèe a kútïì a woâ to' aè njïû jáá.	Being warned in a dream that they shouldn't return to Herod, they went back to their own country another way.
Baná ñgaâa bfee enjep ñgoèñ na a yu ba fá seè'ni? Ñgaâa ñwaè' enjep ñgoèñ na a yu ba fá? Ñgaâa mnsár enjep ñgoèñ na a yu ba fá? Mboè Nyúè aè geèe bfee enjep ñgoèñ aè kútïì ba blúr a?	Where is the wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the lawyer of this world? Hasn't God made foolish the wisdom of this world?
Cu neè neè rfúteè-ñwáè weèe beèe wááwá. Fa naèa neè tu ka', koo neè bkar weèe beèe ce a loèr wap mnyor njep nsheè. Fa kwaè'shi neè ená weèe yu ñgaâa bfee ka'.	Be of the same mind one toward another. Don't set your mind on high things, but associate with the humble. Don't be wise in your own conceits.
Woweèe a m vúè ba' aè rla' Jáèrikuè. E ka' ce loâ aèfo a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ker ba ku' beèe mo', nfeèp moè' aè cu aèwaâa nduunjïì, a ce loo buu. A m too nfeèp ca ená Baètimoès ce muu Timoès.	They came to Jericho. As he went out from Jericho, with his disciples and a great multitude, the son of Timaeus, Bartimaeus, a blind beggar, was sitting by the road.
Ñwáè ce a loèr ye, e ce jaè' yi jaè', yu gaèy ce e túr njeèe anaè ka'. E ka' yá aèmboè kuura ce vúè, e be cañ maè' njeèe, tá kuura koshi mo', bár yi da' aè rïìñ.	He who is a hired hand, and not a shepherd, who doesn't own the sheep, sees the wolf coming, leaves the sheep, and flees. The wolf snatches the sheep, and scatters them.
Woweèe a ka' ce geèe buu ca wa'a, Yú' Rara yi gee yi ba rara ená aèmboè dïû' rara ca yi ku bii aègho na, njïì yi yu neè beèe wááwá aè rniñ mbe dïû' rara ce yi caèa ñger naè ka'.	The Holy Spirit is indicating this, that the way into the Holy Place wasn't yet revealed while the first tabernacle was still standing;
Yàa taa tʉr zhi dìʼ ce e ke cu mboo nfèʼsìp.	My father has a seat where he sits everyday.
Yi yu ená aèmboè rsa' rrúèú anaè li m cu njïìsaèp ka', a ku ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè naè, baná rsa' rfi ce li be cu yi nfeseè na, li be duèñshi foèo Nyúè caèa lïû rrúèú anaè.	For if that which passes away was with glory, much more that which remains is in glory.
Ka' beèe anaè a ce tarni wa'a, blaâa Tata Nyúè vi yu mini, aètaè vi kupseè ka'. Vi yu aèmboè kuèundap wa'a, a sañ mbo enáê, “Tata Nyúè rïìñ beèe ce a yu yïì beèe.” A ker sañ mbo enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' ce laèa ená e ce duè aèmbuèu Tata Jisoès baná ñgaèñ fa keèr geèe buu bbebep ka'.”	"However God's firm foundation stands, having this seal, ""The Lord knows those who are his,"" and, ""Let every one who names the name of the Lord depart from unrighteousness."""
Njeñwáè anaè aè ka' yá ená e yááti aèwañ, e ká' a ce kaèñ, a vú a gwe njeptii Jisoès. E m suñ mbuèu ce e m joèo ye a ker suñ aèmboè e m ku ke'se aè nfeè' ce e m joèo ye anaè aè bsii beèe wááwá.	When the woman saw that she was not hidden, she came trembling, and falling down before him declared to him in the presence of all the people the reason why she had touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
tr.	carry on the back.
Jisoès aè m ku riñ yuu ce woweèe a ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “To' yi ka' gapni, ke' ba cuâu mo'sir ka' baná to' anaè yi be saè'ñger, gweè. Rla' li ka' gapni, ke' ba cuâu mo'sir ka', ndap gapnïì, ke' ba cuâu mo'sir ka' baná aède' rla' anaè li táá ka', ndap anaè táá ka' foñ.	"Knowing their thoughts, Jesus said to them, ""Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand."
Fa feè' mambe efa Ndap Nyúè anaè ka' njobeè' a maè'shi mambe anaè ba neè beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka'. Woweèe a be nyúè'si rla' Nyúè aè mñwáá ncoèp-baa-aè- mñkyeèe.	Leave out the court which is outside of the temple, and don't measure it, for it has been given to the nations. They will tread the holy city under foot for forty-two months.
E gèe wɛɛ.	He has already done it.
Yú' Rara yi suu mbe yeâ nduè, a ba aèmboè beèñ. Njeèndoñ aè laa embe buèu enáê, “AÈ yu muu waè ce m koèñ seê. M ce yu' rboèñ neè wáè seê.”	"and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove on him; and a voice came out of the sky, saying ""You are my beloved Son. In you I am well pleased."""
Buu ce ñwáè e ke geèe yu buu ce beèe a máñni ka'. Buu ca yu mká'ni ba bsaèkïì, mkwaè'shïì aèmboè mká'ni ba bsaèkïì, bsaèkïì ce e duè ba aè yañ,	Now the works of the flesh are obvious, which are: adultery, sexual immorality, uncleanness, lustfulness,
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Byemi neè Tata Jisoès tá aè bo luñ, wáè ker ba beèe embe wáâ ndaèp.”	"They said, ""Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved, you and your household."""
Pol weèe a ka' ce duè, a kashi nfúènfú efa map mkuèu neè woweèe, a du aè rla' IÌkonïìyoèm.	But they shook off the dust of their feet against them, and came to Iconium.
Ndì à bʉsi zhii ŋwàʼ, a kɛʼ a ce jʉʉ enɛ e be gěe kɛ lɛ.	Ndi has lost his book and has begun to wonder what he will do.
Bkuè'sïì vi ba neè Nyúè ce yïìseèe ta seè'ni ba aè nfeè' sïìp. Yi yu wa'a.	Now to our God and Father be the glory forever and ever! Amen.
Yïì masaè aè koosïìmnse neè ye, a laa ená e duê, e maè'shi mbaèa anaè neè ye.	The lord of that servant, being moved with compassion, released him, and forgave him the debt.
Mɛ̀ fa mbàa nè ye enɛ e fa nè zhìi mâ.	I gave money to her so that she should go and give to her mother.
Túè' aè ka' raa, woweèe a natïû aè rla' Bátanïì, a ka' ce duè, njeè aè ce yañ Jisoès.	The next day, when they had come out from Bethany, he was hungry.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' buu anaè vi kuèu ba buu ce seèe ce yá neè mmir aèmboè byee ba buu mno, ker ba ndeèe ce e yu ba aèmboè aède' beèe a su'sïì buu ba nyor. Buu ca ku ba buu enjep ñgoèñ na ce vi be duè baè' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè be geèe buu wááwá tá vi kúti bfi naè.	being only (with meats and drinks and various washings) fleshly ordinances, imposed until a time of reformation.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè wáè, yá'ni beèe ba ñgeâe boèñboñ ce ryá'nïû rboèñboñ li laèa ená beèe a geêe.	But say the things which fit sound doctrine,
Jisoès aè ka' ce caèa, a yá ñwáè moè' ce a m bi ye e ku ba nfeèp.	As he passed by, he saw a man blind from birth.
Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi a baptïìr ye, ñgaèñ be luèñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá byemi ka', baná ñgaèñ be gweè mnsa'.	He who believes and is baptized will be saved; but he who disbelieves will be condemned.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a ce geèe buu bboèñboñ, woweèe a be keè koni bkuè' ba ryu'nïì ba cumúnyañ ese Nyúè. E be keè káè' neè Juês, ka' fa neè beèe enje jáá foñ.	But glory, honor, and peace go to every man who works good, to the Jew first, and also to the Greek.
a ka' yá ená yaèp ntaa aè m ba bcáè' ce woweèe a m ce tar ce geèe btaèp aègho ce fyeèni aèmboè ye ye foñ, e cu a woweèe a ce faè' a woweèe aèbee.	and because he practiced the same trade, he lived with them and worked, for by trade they were tent makers.
Wèr ce kɛ̀ɛni àtu ndoŋ anà.	We are falling out because that cup.
M ka' ce geèe buu ce ya ntee yi koèñ aè rgeèe ka', baná cena yi ce duèñshi ená máè byemi máná mncir vi yu bboèñboñ.	But if what I don't desire, that I do, I consent to the law that it is good.
M ka' ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger Básábuèl baná beèe wee a ke fúr yap byú' anaè ba aè ñger nda? Baná be kuè sa' ba yeè beèe sa' weèe.	But if I cast out demons by Beelzebul, by whom do your children cast them out? Therefore will they be your judges.
Yáê, Tata be fa wáè ñgá'. AÈ be feèp, keèr yá rlir nyúè ka' aè mú nfeè' moè'.” E ka' laèa wa'a, mbaè' aè tar ye aè mmïìr njaè' moè'sir, mmir mi sii ye, e ká' a ce roèo ñwáè ce e be ghashi ye aè rkoo duè aègho.	"Now, behold, the hand of the Lord is on you, and you will be blind, not seeing the sun for a season!"" Immediately a mist and darkness fell on him. He went around seeking someone to lead him by the hand."
E beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Masaè, maè'shi tá yi ku beè táá aè feè' ca, tá m tuñ bgeñ efa gho, fa bbaèr mbú aègho.	He answered, 'Lord, leave it alone this year also, until I dig around it, and fertilize it.
Wowo foñ a teèe btu neè Nyúè seè'ni na tá Nyúè bo koosimnse neè weèe, keèr koosimnse neè woweèe foñ.	even so these also have now been disobedient, that by the mercy shown to you they may also obtain mercy.
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir moè' ce e m ce yu'shi aèmboè Jisoès ce de' a weèe mo' ca weèe, aè yá ená Jisoès aè beèesi buu neè woweèe yáánïì seê. E bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Ncir ce yi yu kuèntombïì neè mncir wááwá a yïì efá?”	"One of the scribes came, and heard them questioning together. Knowing that he had answered them well, asked him, ""Which commandment is the greatest of all?"""
Mkuŋ mi ke bii nè mmbaʼ à mkùu.	Mask juju usually dance with bracelets on their ankles.
Njè ce yaŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ, a mbùu ce mɛ̀ zhe baa kaʼ.	I am not hungry, that is the reason why I havenʼt eaten food.
a ma'shi mnyor. Weèr aè niñ mbe keñ, woweèe a natïì a kúti.	After saying goodbye to each other, we went on board the ship, and they returned home again.
Fa kaèka aè rla' mmbo mbenduè ñwáè ka'. Fa túr bo njep yuu bebep ce beèe mo' a geèe ka'. Geèe ñgeâe rara.	Lay hands hastily on no one, neither be a participant in other men's sins. Keep yourself pure.
Tata yu moè'sir, rbyemïì li ba rmo'sir, baèptir aè ba moè'sir,	one Lord, one faith, one baptism,
Weèe ce kwaè'shi ená aède' yi ba aè njáâá ká ce beèe a ka' niñ coêr, ñwáè wááwá ku ce laèa ba aè li ce e m be yá'ni ka'? Beèe mo' ce a be riñ buu Nyúè boèñboñ ka', ker ba beèe ce a be byemi ka', a ka' niñ, aèmboè a be kwaè'shi yap ená weèe ce baa baa a?	If therefore the whole assembly is assembled together and all speak with other languages, and unlearned or unbelieving people come in, won't they say that you are crazy?
À kaʼ dù à rlaʼ gòr, lor nfèʼ enɛ à bo dàʼ kaʼ.	When you go to a big city, be careful that you shouldnʼt miss your way.
Ŋgɛʼ à to.	The trouble has increased enormously.
Zhìi famɛ̀ anà à càa ŋger.	His generosity is very high.
E lor ye a du aègho a fa neè tu yïû goèr, a laa neè ye enáê, “Pol ce e yu ñwáè shañ naè aè ká' máè, a laa neè máè ená m vú neè muu nsuènsuè ca fa neè wáè njobeè' e roèo suñ wáè yuu mo'.”	"So he took him, and brought him to the commanding officer, and said, ""Paul, the prisoner, summoned me and asked me to bring this young man to you, who has something to tell you."""
Mbuèu moè' ce wer ke yoèñshi Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá yu njobeè' weèr aè m feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè weèe, weèe aè yu' a byemi. Weèe aè m byemi ená blaèa ca aè m ba blaâa ñwáè moè' ka', aè m ba ba blaâa Nyúè. Yi yu mini wa'a. Weèe aè ka' ce byemi blaèa ca wa'a, vi ce kupseè me myoèñ.	For this cause we also thank God without ceasing, that, when you received from us the word of the message of God, you accepted it not as the word of men, but, as it is in truth, the word of God, which also works in you who believe.
Jisoès aè m ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “M be duè ya yu, tá weèe roo máè, yá ka', kwe neè yeè buu bbebep. AÈde' weèe vú faèdïì' ce m ce duè ka'.”	"Jesus said therefore again to them, ""I am going away, and you will seek me, and you will die in your sins. Where I go, you can't come."""
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' kani ncep ca, baná ñgaèñ aè kani ba ñwáè ka', e kani ba Nyúè ce e fa weèe yi Yú' ce yi yu rara.	Therefore he who rejects this doesn't reject man, but God, who has also given his Holy Spirit to you.
Bkar waê, aèmboè Nyúè aè m koñ seèe se naè, see seèe túr aè rkoèñnïì foñ.	Beloved, if God loved us in this way, we also ought to love one another.
njobeè' ntee yi yini woweèe, woweèe a riñ buu ka'. Woweèe a kani aè ryu' buu, a cete map mmir faè dïì' woweèe a bo yá buu neè map mmir, yu' buu neè wap btuè', rïìñ buu, beèeñger vúè yá máè tá m gee tá woweèe a luñ ka'.’	for this people's heart has grown callous, their ears are dull of hearing, they have closed their eyes; or else perhaps they might perceive with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and should turn again; and I would heal them.'
Yaèp beèe a ka' yu', a loo aèbee enáê, “Taâr ñgoèr ce e m geèe rbuu ba nshe, ba mdip, ker ba buu wááwá ce vi yu aè bdïì' ca!	"When they heard it, they lifted up their voice to God with one accord, and said, ""O Lord, you are God, who made the heaven, the earth, the sea, and all that is in them;"
Weèe aè ye rboèñ enjep ñgoèñ, a cu neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè. AÈ m ba nyúè ce a m ce yúshi beèe, weèe aè ku cu aè rye byee, a ce kuè'ñger.	You have lived delicately on the earth, and taken your pleasure. You have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
Jisoès aè ká' woweèe a laa enáê, “Maè'shi neè tá boo ca a vú yá máè. Weèe fa jepsi woweèe ka' njobeè' kúú Nyúè yi yu ba neè beèe ce a yu aèmboè boo ca.	"Jesus summoned them, saying, ""Allow the little children to come to me, and don't hinder them, for the Kingdom of God belongs to such as these."
Woweèe a be geèe buu ca njobeè' woweèe a rïìñ Taèr ka', a riñ máè foñ ka'.	They will do these things because they have not known the Father, nor me.
Weèe aè m yu' nsuñ mboèñmboñ anaè ese ÁÈpafraès ce e yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraâis aèmboè weèr. Weèr koèñ ye seê. E yu weèe woweèe wa'a, a táá ba a weâr tuè, a ce faè' neè Jisos Kraâis neè nteâe mo'sir.	even as you learned of Epaphras our beloved fellow servant, who is a faithful servant of Christ on our behalf,
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá wa'a, a bááñger seê, a laa enáê, “Ce fik ca yi ba yopri cárcár wa'a ba aè njáâá ká?”	"When the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, ""How did the fig tree immediately wither away?"""
Beèe ce a m koo Jisoès naè a m loèr ye a du aègho mbe ndaèp Kaifaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba bleebeèe a m kaari mbo.	Those who had taken Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest, where the scribes and the elders were gathered together.
Felep aè beesïì enáê, “Seèe aè ka' yuu byee aè bbaèa mbaâa bbaa vi ghááteè ka'.”	"Philip answered him, ""Two hundred denarii worth of bread is not sufficient for them, that everyone of them may receive a little."""
adv.	no; affirming the negative.
E ce laèa enáê, ‘Weèe be roèo máè yá máè ka', baè' faèdïì' m be ba ka’, baná e laèa ba ená ká?”	"What is this word that he said, 'You will seek me, and won't find me; and where I am, you can't come'?"""
A ka' baè' aègho, a co'ni bcáè' a laashi mbenduè mo, Jisoès aè ko' a cu mbo.	They brought the young donkey to Jesus, and threw their garments on it, and Jesus sat on it.
Woweèe a m yá ená yi yu yáánïì aè rgeèe wa'a. Neè mini-ñwáè yu yap bdïì' aè rjaè' Juês. Beèe enje jáá a koni bghoènïì efa yuu ce Nyúè aè m geèe neè Juês, baná yi yu boèñboñ ená woweèe a ja' Jus foñ neè buu ce Nyúè aè ghoèni woweèe aègho.	Yes, it has been their good pleasure, and they are their debtors. For if the Gentiles have been made partakers of their spiritual things, they owe it to them also to serve them in fleshly things.
Yi yu rara ená ñwáè tañshi tañshïì moè' ka vúê, ce geèe tañshïì yi aè njáâá jáá, baná mncir vi be kupse foñ.	For the priesthood being changed, there is of necessity a change made also in the law.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá aèmboè rbuu li múè'ti. Li ka' múè'ti, máè yá nyaèabaèraâ' mbúú. Rlii ñwáè ce e m cu mbe nyaèabaèraè' anaè li m ba enáê, “Ñwáè mini ce aède' beèe a foosïì.” E ke sa' mnsa' yáánïì, ku ma' ba bïìr ce e ba maè'.	I saw the heaven opened, and behold, a white horse, and he who sat on it is called Faithful and True. In righteousness he judges and makes war.
Rraa ce li m raa naè li m niñ máè njep mmïìr, máè feêp, beèe ce weèr woweèe aè m ba a koo máè aè boè a du aègho aè rla' Daèmaskoès.	When I couldn't see for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of those who were with me, I came into Damascus.
Woweèe a m duè entombïì a du a táá weèr aè rla' Trowaès.	But these had gone ahead, and were waiting for us at Troas.
M be laèa yuu aèmboè byee ce beèe a ce geèe tañshïì aègho neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na naè. Seèe rïìñ seená seèe wááwá túr bfee. Bfee anaè vi loè gee ñwáè, e naa tu. Yu ba rkoèñnïì ce li ke kupshi beèe.	Now concerning things sacrificed to idols: We know that we all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce laèa wa'a, a ce faèa faèa njobeè' weèe yi yuu ÑWaâ' Nyúè yi laèa ka', a riñ ñger Nyúè foñ ka'.	"Jesus answered them, ""Isn't this because you are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God?"
M ̀ be vʉ̀ tɛ e kaʼ dù.	I will come before he goes.
Jisoès aè ka' ce laèa buu ca neè woweèe, ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' embe ndaèp rloo aè vúê, a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a laa enáê, “Muu waè aè ku kwe seè'ni seè'ni na. Ka' yi yu wa'a, vúè la' mo mmbo mbe yeâ nduèu tá e bo kúti nteèe.”	"While he told these things to them, behold, a ruler came and worshiped him, saying, ""My daughter has just died, but come and lay your hand on her, and she will live."""
Yi yu aè njáâá ká ce ená woweèe a ce laèa ñwáè nsïìp aè ce yu' aè yïì lïî?	How do we hear, everyone in our own native language?
Njeñwáè ca aè bi muu mbañruè ce e be loèr mbaèñ kúú ce a geèe neè bco', sa' bto' wááwá aègho. E ka' bi muu anaè, a koo muu anaè ese ye a cañ a du aègho mbe dïì' Nyúè yu, yi kaèbaèraè' yi ba mbo foñ naè.	She gave birth to a son, a male child, who is to rule all the nations with a rod of iron. Her child was caught up to God, and to his throne.
Kuè ce kwa'shi neè ba aèmboè buu embe buèu, ke' ba aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ ka'.	Set your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth.
Beèe mo' ce a m fa yap ntee neè Nyúè a m tuñ Stáfaèn, a war li rkwe seê.	Devout men buried Stephen, and lamented greatly over him.
E m ba lam ce a cúè' e ce raa seê. Weèe aè m koni li rraa anaè, a lu'shi neè li aè mú nfeè' moè'.	He was the burning and shining lamp, and you were willing to rejoice for a while in his light.
Baná wáè m ba láè ya mbaèa mbe baêñ, máâ kúti, tá m bo koo ya mbaèa neè sá'- ñwáè.	You ought therefore to have deposited my money with the bankers, and at my coming I should have received back my own with interest.
Mɛ̀ cu a ku yuʼ àmbò mbepyor à sòp mɛ̀.	I just sat and felt as if I have a side pain.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ka' sa' Ndap Nyúè ca, m lor mnoâñ btaar ba'rïî.”	"Jesus answered them, ""Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up."""
Weèe aè ka' niñ aè rla', a ke' koni weèe, káè yu'shi yuu ce weèe ce laèa ka', weèe kashïì nfúènfú efa me mkuèu aè to' anaè, duse, aè rduèñshi ená woweèe a geèe yuu bebep.”	"Whoever will not receive you nor hear you, as you depart from there, shake off the dust that is under your feet for a testimony against them. Assuredly, I tell you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city!"""
Bár beèe ce ñgá' ca a m yúshi woweèe ka' naè a m kupse yap ntee a borni efa rgeèe buu bbebep ka'. Woweèe a m ku ce gú'shi neè byú' mnyúâmkaè', ker ba mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ce a m kupshi ba neè mmbo. A m kupshi mnyúè anaè ba neè bco' aèmboè gul ba selvaè, ba broên. A ker kupshi mmo' ba neè bluèr, ba mntaañguu. AÈde' mnyúè anaè vi yá buu, káè yu' buu, káè jár ka'.	The rest of mankind, who were not killed with these plagues, didn't repent of the works of their hands, that they wouldn't worship demons, and the idols of gold, and of silver, and of brass, and of stone, and of wood; which can neither see, nor hear, nor walk.
Wee ce duè, ñwáè fa loèr mbaèa, ka' múcaèr áè, láè njep posaè tá e bo duè aègho ka'.	Don't take any gold, nor silver, nor brass in your money belts.
E ka' keèr duè kúti, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ku bii buumi a ce lúèshi a? Yi gháá seè'ni, nfeè' aè gháá. A be fa Muu Ñwáè mbe mmbo ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.	"He came the third time, and said to them, ""Sleep on now, and take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners."
E zhɛ̀ɛ cɛ̀ a kaʼ koo ye, rìtu zhi koo ye.	When she was caught stealing a cloth, she was full/full of shame.
AÈ ka ba aè nfeè' anaè, nshe aè ci'tïì seê. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' rúêú, efa mndap efa ma rla' anaè aè gweñgeèr aè nsheè. Nshe anaè aè ka' cïì'ti wa'a, a yúshi beèe ncúèkïì saèambaê. Beèe ce a m báti naè a wáp seê. A ka' wáp wa'a, a ku'si Nyúè embe buèu.	In that day there was a great earthquake, and a tenth of the city fell. Seven thousand people were killed in the earthquake, and the rest were terrified, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
Waè' máè kúti ñwáè bbaèa neè weèe njobeè' m ce suñ weèe yuu mini a?	So then, have I become your enemy by telling you the truth?
Ka' e m laèa ená e fa suñ ñwáè ka' wa'a, nsuñ aè ker misi a du aè bdïì' wááwá, beèe a ce vúè aè bkúr aè bkúr tá a bo yu' buu ce e m ce yá'ni, tá e bo gee woweèe a luñ efa wap byañ.	But the report concerning him spread much more, and great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their infirmities.
Woweèe a ka' yu', a cañ a du a ñgoâñ Lïìkonïìyaè, a ka' baè', a du aè rla' Listraè ba Dábeè, ba mla' ce mi m ba aègee mla' ca,	they became aware of it, and fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, Derbe, and the surrounding region.
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, beèe a vú neè beèe magoèr ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m ba njep woweèe. Jisoès aè laêa, byú' bbebep anaè vi fúú enjep woweèe, a ker gee beèe wááwá ce a m ce yañ a ke'seè.	When evening came, they brought to him many possessed with demons. He cast out the spirits with a word, and healed all who were sick;
Ñwáè wááwá aè beèesi njïì neè Nyúè. Woweèe wááwá a kúti buu bcicïì. Ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce geèe yuu boèñboñ ka', ka' ñwáè moè'sir.	"They have all turned aside. They have together become unprofitable. There is no one who does good, no, not, so much as one."""
Yuu ce yi ke fúú ekuè cuèu, yi ke loè ba enjep ntee. A njáèá yuu ce yi ke geèe ñwáè e ba jaèpri aè bsii Nyúè.	But the things which proceed out of the mouth come out of the heart, and they defile the man.
A m sañ rlii nje nsaèpsi njeñwáè ca. Rlii anaè li m táá ba aètu ñgaèa ce a m maè'. Rlii anaè li m ba enáê, “Babiloèn ce ñgoèr, ma ñwáè bsaèkïì, ba ma ñwáè bsaèrbuu enjep ñgoèñ na.”	"And on her forehead a name was written, ""MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF THE PROSTITUTES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH."""
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená e ke ba nfeè' mcañnïì, ñgaèa mcañnïì a cañ wa'a, lo koo blaè' bsïìp ka' a? Baná weèe cañ boèñboñ tá weèe bo koo blaè'.	Don't you know that those who run in a race all run, but one receives the prize? Run like that, that you may win.
mbeèñ aè gweê, mdip mi ruu, fu' yi caa a ci' ndap anaè, e gweê, a koo yuu efa gho ka'.”	"The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it fell--and great was its fall."""
Ŋkʉʉ à ba ce làa, ŋgòŋ zhi noŋ enɛ nyòŋ.	While the chief was speaking, the crowd was quiet.
Ŋgwe ce e tɛɛ na feese yèr.	This dog, which is standing, resembles ours.
E yu ñwáè ce bcor wááwá a ce, a tuu ená weèr woweèe jár koo rfa ca. Cena yu rfaè' ce li be geèe tá beèe a ku'si Tata Nyúè, keèr rïìñ foñ ená weèr ce koèñ aè rjaè' bfúr wer.	Not only so, but who was also appointed by the assemblies to travel with us in this grace, which is served by us to the glory of the Lord himself, and to show our readiness.
Weèe ce yu' yuu ce m ce laèa ka' njoká? Weèe ce yu' ka' njobeè' yi yu aètáèr neè weèe aè ryu' ka'.	Why don't you understand my speech? Because you can't hear my word.
Nàanyor bòŋ kaʼ.	Pride is not good.
Ya yu yo, yo aè ba ya. A kuè'si máè njo' woweèe.	All things that are mine are yours, and yours are mine, and I am glorified in them.
Maèsaè Tïìyofiloès, mbe ya ñwaè' entombïì ce máè m sañ neè wáè naè, máè m sañ buu wááwá ce Jisoès aè m geèe ker ba vïì ce e m yá'ni, káâ' aè nfeè' ce e m káè' li rfaè',	The first book I wrote, Theophilus, concerned all that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
Mbañruèñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka', ka' koñ ená a ñgwa a gapni, aède' a ye a ku gapni. Njeñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka', ka' koñ ená a nduu yïì a gapni, aède' a ye a ku gapni. A ye a ka' gapni baná ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì, káè yu mbañruèñwáè áè, káè yu njeñwáè áè, e bú' ncir Nyúè ka'. Nyúè aè ká' seèe ená seèe bo cu rcu ce li yu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	Yet if the unbeliever departs, let there be separation. The brother or the sister is not under bondage in such cases, but God has called us in peace.
Woweèe a yop yáá, a natïî, a du mbe rtuèu Oleèf.	When they had sung a hymn, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
Govanoè aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè efa beèe a mmbaa ca ce weèe ce koèñ weená m fúr embe shañ fa neè weèe yu nda?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Baèrabaès.”	"But the governor answered them, ""Which of the two do you want me to release to you?"" They said, ""Barabbas!"""
E natïì mbekïì, a lor yi keèñ a ce fúú aègho. Beèe wááwá aè ce fyá', a bááñger, a ku'si Nyúè, a ce laèa enáê, “Weèr a m be yá njáèá yuu ca ka'!”	"He arose, and immediately took up the mat, and went out in front of them all; so that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying, ""We never saw anything like this!"""
Weèr aè m ce geèe wa'a yi ke' ba ená weèr aè m buu ñger aè rlaèa ená weèe ja' weèr ka'. Weèr aè m geèe wa'a tá weèe bo yá'ni, ce faè' aèmboè weèr aè m ce faè'.	not because we don't have the right, but to make ourselves an example to you, that you should imitate us.
Ñwáè embe yeâ njïì aè laasïì ye, a kwe foñ.	The second took her as wife, and he died childless.
Hároèd aè m koo Joân, a kur, a fa mbe shañ. Hároèd aè m fa ye mbe shañ aètu Háèrodïìyaè ce e m ba ñgwa nfúr yïì ce Feleêp.	For Herod had laid hold of John, and bound him, and put him in prison for the sake of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
M ce loo máná Tata Jisoès túr ntee boèñboñ neè beèe Nyúè wááwá. Yi yu wa'a. Esclarecimento Trata-se de iniciativa particular, com os seguintes objetivos: (i) colaborar para divulgação dos diversos textos bíblicos disponíveis, e, (ii) facilitar o acesso a esses textos, inclusive por meio de download. Todo esforço em tornar a Palavra de Deus acessível a todos, em quaisquer localidades e falantes das mais diversas línguas, precisa ser um objetivo de todos os que são guiados pelo Espírito Santo. Ele inspirou o profeta Jeremias a dizer “não ensinará jamais cada um ao seu próximo, nem cada um ao seu irmão, dizendo: Conhece ao SENHOR, porque todos me conhecerão, desde o menor até ao maior deles, diz o SENHOR” (Jer. 31:34). Jesus, também, falou assim: “e será pregado este evangelho do reino por todo o mundo, para testemunho a todas as nações” (Mat. 24:14). Muitas organizações foram constituídas com o propósito de fazer a Bíblia disponível nas diversas línguas. Não é uma tarefa simples. Anos de trabalho, dedicação e entrega são necessários para esta tão extraordinária missão. O texto deste trabalho está disponível na internet, em páginas eletrônicas de organizações que produzem ou divulgam bíblias, sem acréscimos de notas ou comentários. Assim, reconhecendo e respeitando os direitos que possuem sobre seus trabalhos, incumbe a todos os que amam a Palavra de Deus, o esforço em contribuir para amplificar sua divulgação. Se possível, faça download do texto, para que sejamos, também, guardiões da Bíblia, e, com isso, preservando-a para as futuras gerações. Divulga a Palavra de Deus, ela mostra o Caminho e permite a todos, que se conheça Sua vontade, em todos os lugares e épocas. Marcel da Glória Pereira	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with all the saints. Amen.
AÈ m ba kwa'shi ba máè ená m be feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè beèe, máè m ba koo blaè' ese woweèe. Yi ke' ba wa'a ka'. M ku ce geèe ba rfaè' ce Nyúè aè m fa mba máâ mmboè.	For if I do this of my own will, I have a reward. But if not of my own will, I have a stewardship entrusted to me.
Tá Nyúè ce e ke geèe seèe kur ntee, túr ñger, ja' weèe tá weèe be'ni ndeèe Jisos Kraêis, cu weèe bfúr wee weèe neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè,	Now the God of patience and of encouragement grant you to be of the same mind one with another according to Christ Jesus,
Mbʉ zhi ke koŋ à rkar àmʉ̀ bee kaʼ.	Goats donʼt like to move among people.
Beèe caê, baná weèe kur ntee njobeè' máè byemi máná yi be kuè ba aèmboè Nyúè aè laèa neè máè.	Therefore, sirs, cheer up! For I believe God, that it will be just as it has been spoken to me.
AÈmboè weèr aè rïìñ aèmboè mnsa' Tataê, a ce wáp ye, weèr ce gheèter aè rgeèe tá beèe a kupse. Nyúè rïìñ njáèá beèe ce weèr yu, máè ce kwaè'shi máná wee weèe foñ aè rïìñ njáèá beèe ce weèr yu.	Knowing therefore the fear of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are revealed to God; and I hope that we are revealed also in your consciences.
Werwèr à yɛ enɛ zhi be ba yɛɛnì.	We too have seen that it will be nice.
M rïìñ ye ñgeèe. Weèe ce fúte ka', a ke' ce luèu ka'. Máâ koèñ máná weèe aè ka' tá ce luèu ka', weèe ce fúte.	"I know your works, that you are neither cold nor hot. I wish you were cold or hot.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	16	AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèe ku ba ye yu ba mbe btaar, a ke' ce luèu ka', a ce fúte ka', baná m be ce weèe eku máâ cuèu.	So, because you are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I will vomit you out of my mouth.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	17	Weèe ce laèa weená ryúr li boèñ weèe, weèe aè ku' aè buu, a ke' buu yuu mo' ka'. AÈmboè weèe ce yá weená weèe yu ñgaâa ñgá' ce beèe a ba koosimnse neè weèe a? Weèe yu ñgaâa fuèp, a feêp, a ker ce kar mbuèuriñ.	Because you say, 'I am rich, and have gotten riches, and have need of nothing;' and don't know that you are the wretched one, miserable, poor, blind, and naked;
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	18	Ncep ce m ce fa neè weèe yu ená weèe vú yá máè, yuu gul ce a toèo mbaè mor a gee e raa, tá weèe bo kuè' aè buu. Weèe vú yuu bcáâ' bbúú ese máè yar aè nyoèr faè dïì' weèe bo keèr ce kar mbuèuriñ tá beèe a ce vúèshi weèe ka'. Weèe vú yuu mcáèp ese máè fa nje mmïìr tá weèe bo yá buu.	I counsel you to buy from me gold refined by fire, that you may become rich; and white garments, that you may clothe yourself, and that the shame of your nakedness may not be revealed; and eye salve to anoint your eyes, that you may see.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	19	Beèe ce máè koèñ a beèe ce má ke lapni woweèe, nashi woweèe. Baná weèe lor nfeè', kupse, vú a máâ mbuu neè ntee e mo'sir.	As many as I love, I reprove and chasten. Be zealous therefore, and repent.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	20	Yáê, máè táá kuè ncúèúndúè' a ce kuèushi keèñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' yu' yaè njeèndoñ, mú' keèñ, baná m be niñ mbe yeâ ndaèp tá weèr ye yeñger aèbee.	Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If anyone hears my voice and opens the door, then I will come in to him, and will dine with him, and he with me.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	21	Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap, caa rmoèoshïì baná m be maè'shi tá ñwáè anaè vú cu a máâ geñ mbe máâ kaèbaèraè' aèmboè má máè aè m caèa rmoèoshïì a cu weèr yaè Ta mbe yi kaèbaèraè' naè.	He who overcomes, I will give to him to sit down with me on my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father on his throne.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	22	Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies."
Woowèe a tapse ye rfàʼ nè mbàa.	They appreciated his work with money.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe be war ce koosimnse, tá ñgoèñ yi ce lu'shi yi yu. Weèe be señ buu tá yeè nseñ buu anaè lo kúti ba aè rlu'shïì.	Most certainly I tell you, that you will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. You will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will be turned into joy.
Pitaè aè ka' yá ye, a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Tataê, yi yu yi ká aèmboè ñwáè ca?”	"Peter seeing him, said to Jesus, ""Lord, what about this man?"""
Wèr à jàasi ndèe nzhe buu embe côr.	We have condemned the habit of eating in church.
Mú nfeè' moè' aè ka' tuuse, beèe ce a m ba aèfo a ko'shïì aègee Pitaè, a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ yu moè' efa woweèe ghup njobeè' njáèá njïì ce aè ce laèa yi ce duèñshi wa'a.”	"After a little while those who stood by came and said to Peter, ""Surely you are also one of them, for your speech makes you known."""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yu nda efa weâe mú ce e ka' túr njeèe, e gwe njep beè'teè nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, e ke' koo enjo, fúr mbe ñkúè ka'?	"He said to them, ""What man is there among you, who has one sheep, and if this one falls into a pit on the Sabbath day, won't he grab on to it, and lift it out?"
Ŋwɛ̀ ce e ba vʉ àfa nà yû?	Where is that man who came here?
Rbyemïì li m geèe saèkïì ce a m ce too ená Rahaèp aè sútïì beèe Isráèl ce a m vúè aè rker ñgoèñ naè mbe yeâ ndaèp. AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' ce beèe ce a m teèe btu neè Nyúè aè m kweñger naè, e kwe ka'.	By faith, Rahab the prostitute, didn't perish with those who were disobedient, having received the spies in peace.
Máè m ba ñwáè ce máè m ce bepsi rlii Jisos Kraêis, a ce fa yïì beèe ñgá', a ce geèe bsaèrbuu neè beèe. Ka' máè m ba njáèá ñwáâ wa'a, Nyúè aè koosïìmnse neè máè njobeè' máè m ce geèe buu ca wa'a, a be byemi neè Jisos Kraâis ka', a riñ ená a buu bbebep ka'.	although I was before a blasphemer, a persecutor, and insolent. However, I obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly in unbelief.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a waa mbekïì enáê, “Lasoèroès, fúú enjo!”	"When he had said this, he cried with a loud voice, ""Lazarus, come out!"""
Baná weèe aè m fúú a du ba aè ryá ká seê? Weèe aè m duè ba aè ryá ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè a? ÁÈno, m ce suñ weèe máná ñwáè ce weèe aè m yá anaè caèa ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	But what did you go out to see? A prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.
Bfúr weêr, aèmboè yi yu wa' seè'ni na, weèr ka' ce yá ñgá' ce weèr ce yá na, ce yu' ryañ ce weèr ce yu' na, weèr ce yu' rboèñ neè weèe, ntee yi fúte weèr njobeè' weèe ku táá tatap njep le rbyemïì.	for this cause, brothers, we were comforted over you in all our distress and affliction through your faith.
Wɛ̀r à mʉ koo mkuu anà a lɛ̂ àmbommɛr.	We took the money and kept on our own.
Ku' beèe ce a m cute a Jisoès weèe naè, a m laèa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, yoè ma ba bfúr gho ba bjar gho a yu njepmbeè a ce roèo wáè.”	"A multitude was sitting around him, and they told him, ""Behold, your mother, your brothers, and your sisters are outside looking for you."""
Yïì ta ba yïì ma a ka' yá ye a bááñger seê. Yïì ma aè laa neè ye enáê, “Muu waè, wáè geèe neè weèr wa' njoká? Weèr yoè ta aè roèo wáè, tu yi korñgeèr weèr.”	"When they saw him, they were astonished, and his mother said to him, ""Son, why have you treated us this way? Behold, your father and I were anxiously looking for you."""
Seèe aè koni rboèñ ca njo' yuu mo' ce seèe aè geèe ka', faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo naèa nyor ená e geèe yuu mo' a ka' koni ka'.	not of works, that no one would boast.
ce láè njeptii ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès, woweèe a ce loèr mbaèa anaè ce gaèpshi neè beèe ce a m túr yuu ka'.	and laid them at the apostles' feet, and distribution was made to each, according as anyone had need.
Ŋwɛ̀ mòʼ yu lùŋgà kaʼ.	No one is like the eternal one.
Jisoès aè m yu' ená a juèu ñwáè anaè embe ndaèp rloo. E ka' roèo ye yá, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Wáè byemi neè Muu Ñwáè a?”	"Jesus heard that they had thrown him out, and finding him, he said, ""Do you believe in the Son of God?"""
Bfúr waê, weèe fa ce rúè'ñger ka', faè dïì' a bo sa' weèe ka'. Ñwáè ce e be teni viseèe mnsa' yu aètútú.	Don't grumble, brothers, against one another, so that you won't be judged. Behold, the judge stands at the door.
AÈde' ñwáè moè' laa yi enáê, “Wáè túr rbyemïì, máè túr ndeâe mboèñmboñ.” M be beèesi neè ñwáè ce e laèa wa' mánáê, “Duèñshi ka máè lo rbyemïì ce li buu ndeâe mboèñmboñ, tá m duñshi wáè yaè ndeâe mboèñmboñ tá aè yá wáná máè túr rbyemïì.”	"Yes, a man will say, ""You have faith, and I have works."" Show me your faith without works, and I by my works will show you my faith."
E tose mbe tar ndap.	He has passed through the veranda.
Nfeè' aè ka' gháá, Jisoès ba yi ñgaâa ntuu a cuteè a sir tábuèr.	When the hour had come, he sat down with the twelve apostles.
E lá'si nyor, nfeè' múcaèr lese aèmboè li rfeese li ba ba.	for he sees himself, and goes away, and immediately forgets what kind of man he was.
A ka' yá woweèe ka', a koo Jasïìn ba bfúr mo', a súêñ, a du aègho a fa neè ñgaâa kansuèr, a laa mbekïì enáê, “Beèe ca ce a beèesi ñgoèñ tútúèñ na, a vúè a ba' aèfa foñ.	"When they didn't find them, they dragged Jason and certain brothers before the rulers of the city, crying, ""These who have turned the world upside down have come here also,"
E ba nyɛɛ à du ntaa.	She got up early and went to the market.
M ce suñ weèe máná ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè magoèr ba bkúú magoèr a m ce koèñ aè ryá buu ce weèe ce yá na, a yá ka', a koñ aè ryu' buu ce weèe ce yu' na, a yu' ka'.”	"for I tell you that many prophets and kings desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them, and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them."""
M be loo aè rlaèa mú laèa blúr. Baná weèe ku fa mú nfeè' moè' yu'shi blaèa anaè.	I wish that you would bear with me in a little foolishness, but indeed you do bear with me.
Weèr aè ka' tuu roâ aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè ba aè ñgoâñ Paèmfilïìyaè a du a ba' aè rla' Miraè aè ñgoâñ Lishaè.	When we had sailed across the sea which is off Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, a city of Lycia.
Rbì rler rli sɛɛ.	Our kola nut is slimy.
Btar boo, weèe fa geèe tá ntee yi ce yañ boo wee ka'. Weèe yá'ni woweèe, cep woweèe aè njáèá njïì ce Tata Jisoès koèñ.	You fathers, don't provoke your children to wrath, but nurture them in the discipline and instruction of the Lord.
Wer à yɛ nè mer mmir.	We saw it ourselves.
A m maè'shi ená mñguu vi yú beèe ca ka'. A m laèa ená vi fa beèe ca ba ñgá' aè mñwáá taê. Ñgá' anaè aè m ba aèmboè njáèá ryañ ce ñwáè ce nyobsaa aè ta e ke yu' naè.	They were given power not to kill them, but to torment them for five months. Their torment was like the torment of a scorpion, when it strikes a person.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, buu ca wááwá vi koni tá yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m sañ yi bo ghááte njo.” Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu wááwá a ma' ye, a cañse.	"But all this has happened, that the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled."" Then all the disciples left him, and fled."
AÈ ce kwaè'shi wáná aède' m ke' laa neè yaè Ta tá e ku tuusi máè vi bcïìndap bkúr aèñgoo ka' a?	Or do you think that I couldn't ask my Father, and he would even now send me more than twelve legions of angels?
Rboâñtu li be ba neè ñwáè rfaè' ce yïì masaè aè ka' kúti, yá aèmboè e ce geèe li rfaè' aè njáâá wa'a.	Blessed is that servant whom his lord finds doing so when he comes.
Nyor aè m ba ku ba rlir, ñwáè aè m ba ce yu' buu ba neè ká? Nyor aè m ba ku ba tuè', ñwáè aè m ba ce yu' rúèú yuu ba neè ká?	If the whole body were an eye, where would the hearing be? If the whole were hearing, where would the smelling be?
“Máè geèe yoè beèe ce wáè m fa mba máâ mmboè efa múè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a riñ wáè. Beèe anaè aè m ba yoè beèe, wáè fa woweèe neè máè. Woweèe a yu'ni neè wo blaèa.	I revealed your name to the people whom you have given me out of the world. They were yours, and you have given them to me. They have kept your word.
Weèe rïìñ wáá aèmboè weèr a m yá ñgá', beèe a jar neè weèr aè rla' Fileèpaêi. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, weèr aè m kur ntee aè ñger yeèr Nyúè a suñ weèe Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce e loè ba ese ye, ka' beèe aè m ker ku jepsi weèr se wa'a.	but having suffered before and been shamefully treated, as you know, at Philippi, we grew bold in our God to tell you the Good News of God in much conflict.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' máè m vúè yá weèe naè, weèe aè lu'shïì seê. Yuu ce yi koni seè'ni aè koni ká? Máè rïìñ máná aè m ba mbe nfeè' anaè, weèe aè koñ máè seê. A m ba laa mbe nfeè' anaè ená ñwáè co'ni mmir enje tuè fa neè máè, ñgaèñ aè m ba kuè geèe wa'a.	What was the blessing you enjoyed? For I testify to you that, if possible, you would have plucked out your eyes and given them to me.
Yuu ce aède' yi gee weèe riñ Yú' Nyúè yi yu ená, yú' wááwá ce yi byemi ená Jisos Kraâis aè m beèeñger aè ñwáè, a vú njep ñgoèñ, yi loè ese Nyúè.	By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit who confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God,
“Waè' viseèe mncir vi byemi ená a sa' mnsa' ñwáè, fa ñgaèñ aè shañ, ce a be ká' a yu' yuu ce ñgaèñ aè laèa ka' a?”	Does our law judge a man, unless it first hears from him personally and knows what he does?
Weèr aè natïì a ce duè, túè' aè ka' raa weèr aè ba' a ce yá rla' Kiyoès nje weâr cuèu. Túè' moè' aè ka' raa, weèr aè ba' aè rla' Samoès. Túè' moè' aè ka' keèr raa weèr aè ba' aè rla' Milátoès.	Sailing from there, we came the following day opposite Chios. The next day we touched at Samos and stayed at Trogyllium, and the day after we came to Miletus.
Mbuèu moè' ker ba aègho neè má aè rsañ neè weèe kuu rfa ce weèe aè ba fa tá a bo jaè' beèe Nyúè aègho naè ka'.	It is indeed unnecessary for me to write to you concerning the service to the saints,
Bzhee bvi yaa ye lùuni sê.	Her crops have produced much this year.
Mɛrì à yuu cɛ̀ fii zhi zhiʼ ye.	Mary bought a new dress but it could not fit her.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè keñ aè duè neè yi yu aènjïìsaèp seê, mdip mi ce ko' mbekïì ce suèu, a ce túú nyor nje keñ njobeè' fu' yi m ce caèa magoèr.	But the boat was now in the middle of the sea, distressed by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
E duê, a táá mbenduè njeñwáè anaè a laêa, mbáp anaè aè bornïì. Nfeè' aè ke' tuuse ka', njeñwáè anaè natïì mbekïì a fár byee a fa neè woweèe.	He stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her. Immediately she rose up and served them.
Ndoèo aè co' ñgoèñ njobeè' buu yu njep ñgoèñ ce vi ke geèe beèe a ce geèe buu bbebep. Buu ca vi be kuè ce ba. Ka' yi yu wa'a, ndoèo be co' ñwáè ce buu ca vi be vúè njo' ye.	"Woe to the world because of occasions of stumbling! For it must be that the occasions come, but woe to that person through whom the occasion comes!
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	8	Yo bo káè yo kuèu áè, yi ka' gee wáè, aè gee yuu bebep, aè tee ma'. Yi yu aèndeèe ená aè niñ mbe dïû' rcu ce nfeseè, buu bo káè kuèu áè, neè ce ená a ke koo wáè maè' njep mor ce aède' yi liitïì ka'.	If your hand or your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life maimed or crippled, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	9	Lo rlir li ka' gee wáè, aè gee yuu bebep, aè so'nïì enje tuè, ma'. Yi yu aèndeèe ená aè ba ntoè' rlir, niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè neè ce ená aè túr mmir mmbaa, tá a ke koo wáè maè' njep beè'teè ñgá' mor.	If your eye causes you to stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from you. It is better for you to enter into life with one eye, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the Gehenna of fire.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	10	“Yá neè ená weèe fa loèr moè' efa boo bká' ca aè yuu cicïì ka'. M ce suñ weèe máná wap bcïìndap ce a yu mbe buèu, a ke kuâ ba aè bsii yaè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu aè nfeè' sïìp.	See that you don't despise one of these little ones, for I tell you that in heaven their angels always see the face of my Father who is in heaven.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	11	[Muu Ñwáè aè m vúè aè rgeèe tá beèe ce a m bú, a luêñ.]	For the Son of Man came to save that which was lost.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	12	Weèe ce kwaè'shi wee ká? Ñwáè aè ka' túr njeèe rjeèe, moè' da' bú, mboè e be maè'shi yïû ncoèp-búè'ú-aè-mmbúè'ú aè rtuèu duè roèo yïì ce e daè' na a?	What do you think? If a man has one hundred sheep, and one of them goes astray, doesn't he leave the ninety-nine, go to the mountains, and seek that which has gone astray?"
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè ye, e luèñ efa mnsa'. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá byemi neè ye ka', baná ñgaèñ aè gweè mnsa' njobeè' e kani efa rbyemi neè Muu yïì ce e ku ba moè'sir.	He who believes in him is not judged. He who doesn't believe has been judged already, because he has not believed in the name of the one and only Son of God.
Ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' aè m ba aè múè Juês, a too ye ená Nïìkoèdámoès. E m ba moè' efa múè beèe Farïìsïî.	Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
AÈ ba neètú', Nyúè ce e túr máè, ce máâ ke loo neè ye, aè tuusïì yïì ncïìndap, e vú a táá a máâ geñ,	For there stood by me this night an angel, belonging to the God whose I am and whom I serve,
E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a doo bkeñ a du aègho aè waâa roè, a ma'shi buu wááwá a du a yeâ mbuèu.	When they had brought their boats to land, they left everything, and followed him.
Ñwáè e ke cep ntuu Nyúè, yi ja' beèe, fa beèe ñger, ker gee mntee beèe vi fúteè.	But he who prophesies speaks to men for their edification, exhortation, and consolation.
E ke toosi làa sê.	He twists his tongue too much.
M ̀ be kàa baa mbe ŋgòʼ.	I will grind corn roughly on the grinding stone.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ laèa yo cuèu. M ce suñ weèe wááwá máná ká' e seè'ni na, weèe be yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e cu aè rkoo maè' Nyúè ce e túr ñger wááwá, keèr yá foñ aèmboè e ce suèu mbenduè mmbaè' embe buèu.”	"Jesus said to him, ""You have said it. Nevertheless, I tell you, after this you will see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming on the clouds of the sky."""
Boo waê, m ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè weèe faè dïì' weèe bo geèe buu bbebep ka'. Geewa'a yi ka' koni ená ñwáè moè' aè geèe yuu bebep, weèe yi ená seèe túr ñwáè njaè' beèe aègee Taèr. Ñwáè anaè yu Jisos Kraâis ce yu ñwáâ nyáánïì.	My little children, I write these things to you so that you may not sin. If anyone sins, we have a Counselor with the Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous.
A ke rïìñ ce neè mbaèñ ce anaè. AÈde' ñwáè kú rbïì embe ráp ka', káè leèemú embe rgúè ka'.	For each tree is known by its own fruit. For people don't gather figs from thorns, nor do they gather grapes from a bramble bush.
Sáèra ye ye aè m ce yu'ni neè Abraèhaêm, a ce yoèñ ye ená yïì masaè. Weèe yu boo vi ce weèe aè ka' ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ, ke' ce wáp yuu mo' ka'.	as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children you now are, if you do well, and are not put in fear by any terror.
E m kwe mbe kïìntaa, a gee seèe Nyúè weèe aè kútïì aèbee. E m geèe mmbaèni anaè yi mïî,	and might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, having killed the hostility thereby.
Ca yi m geèe Pol ba Baènabaès a ba aè yuu yi mo'sir a woweèe ka' koo múcaèr, a sár nsár a woweèe. Yi ka' ba wa'a, ñgaâa cor a ce Pol ba Baènabaès, ba beèe mo', ená a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, yá ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ba btu embe cor ená a woweèe a seesi yuu ce a be geèe.	Therefore when Paul and Barnabas had no small discord and discussion with them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and some others of them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders about this question.
Weèr ce loo foñ ená Nyúè lor yi ñger ce yi caèa buu wááwá gee tá weèe túr ntee tatap, ka' aè ka' ba ba ká, tá weèe bo kur ntee, táá tatap keèr ce lu'shi,	strengthened with all power, according to the might of his glory, for all endurance and perseverance with joy;
Cena a ñgá' entombïì efa mñgá' ce vi be koni. Mñgá' ce vi bii ka' koni vi báti vi bbaa.	The first woe is past. Behold, there are still two woes coming after this.
Tee nyàa anà àgho.	Cut that meat with it.
M ka' ce yoèñshi Nyúè aè byee ce m ce ye, beèe mo' a laa bebep aèmboè máè aè njáâá ká?”	If I partake with thankfulness, why am I denounced for that for which I give thanks?
Buu ca vi m koni tá yi bo ghááte aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “A be keè kep yi vúp mo' ka'.”	"For these things happened, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, ""A bone of him will not be broken."""
Ñwáè rfaè' ce e ka' riñ yuu ce yïì masaè ce koèñ, ke' tami nyor, gee yuu ce yïì masaè ce koèñ ka', baná a be lïìp ye neè mñgwaèa aèñgoo.	That servant, who knew his lord's will, and didn't prepare, nor do what he wanted, will be beaten with many stripes,
Pol aè ka' káè' ce suñ aèmboè ñgeâe yáánïì ba aèmboè aède' ñwáè kur ntee ker ba aèmboè noèñ mnsa' Nyúè, Fálïìs aè wáêp, a laa enáê, “Wáè laèa yi gháá seè'ni. Duè yo yu. M be koni fáñ tá m ka' keèr tuu beèe tá a vú neè wáè.”	"As he reasoned about righteousness, self-control, and the judgment to come, Felix was terrified, and answered, ""Go your way for this time, and when it is convenient for me, I will summon you."""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Wee weèe aè be riñ buu foñ ka' a?	"So Jesus said, ""Do you also still not understand?"
Nyúè aè m geèe ye e ba yáánïì seê, a ba seè'ni na ba ñwáè ce e ce fa ryoèñ ce nfeseè neè beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè ye.	Having been made perfect, he became to all of those who obey him the author of eternal salvation,
Joân aè beesïì a laa enáê, “AÈtaè ñwáè túr yuu mo' caa efa yïì ce Nyúè aè fa neè ye ka'.	"John answered, ""A man can receive nothing, unless it has been given him from heaven."
Beèe Farïìsi mo' a vú a mooshi ye, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ncir yi byemi ená ñwáè juu ñgwa yïì ka' aètu ká a?”	"Pharisees came to him, testing him, and saying, ""Is it lawful for a man to divorce his wife for any reason?"""
Weèe aè fa beèe ce a geèe faèa ka' aè ñgá', a yúshi woweèe, woweèe a ke' gee yuu mo' ka'.	You have condemned, you have murdered the righteous one. He doesn't resist you.
Anaès aè laêa, a lor ye aèmboè a m kur naè, a duè aègho, a yá Kaifaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.	Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas, the high priest.
A m yuu weèe ba neè bláá Kraâis ce vi luèu ntaa seê, a ba aèmboè bláá fuâu njeèe tañshïì ce yi yu yáánïì, já' yi ba aègho ka'.	but with precious blood, as of a faultless and pure lamb, the blood of Christ;
Pol aè m cu mbe ndaèp aè bfeâ' bbaa a ce laè' ndap anaè. E m ce koni beèe wááwá ce a m ce vúè aè ryá ye.	Paul stayed two whole years in his own rented house, and received all who were coming to him,
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè cenïì gráâp enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá neè saè', a ma' njep beè'teè tá a bo nyáèñ tá mdip mi fúú enjo. Rnyáèñ efa gho anaè li táá aètu rshentee Nyúè.	The angel thrust his sickle into the earth, and gathered the vintage of the earth, and threw it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
AÈde' m ker naatu aè yuu jáá caa efa rfaè' ce máè geèe aè ñger Kraâis aè múè beèe enje jáá ka'. Woweèe a ce yu'ni neè Kraâis njo' buu ce máè laèa ker ba buu ce máè geèe.	For I will not dare to speak of any things except those which Christ worked through me, for the obedience of the Gentiles, by word and deed,
M ka' tá yu' li ce ñwáè ce laèa ka', baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè nfuu neè máè, má máè aè ba ñwáè nfuu neè ye.	If then I don't know the meaning of the sound, I would be to him who speaks a foreigner, and he who speaks would be a foreigner to me.
Taantoʼ yu ŋkʉ̀.	Tanto is a bachelor.
E zhe lèʼ enɛ e be kèr gèe kaʼ.	He has vowed that he will not do it again.
Beèe magoèr a m vúè a yá ye aèfo, a ká' a ce laèa enáê, “Joân aè m geèe yuu mo' aè rduèñshi ená aè m tuu ba Nyúè a tuu ye ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, buu ce Joân aè m laèa aèmboè ñwáè ca vi yu mini.”	"Many came to him. They said, ""John indeed did no sign, but everything that John said about this man is true."""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè buu ce beèe a be baè'ri ndap anaè aègho, beèe mo' a be baè'ri neè bco' ce a too ená guêl, ba bco' ce a too ená silvaè, ba bluèr ce vi luèu ntaa seê. Beèe mo' a be baè'ri yap neè mntaañguu ba bvúp msañ, ba bbuu.	But if anyone builds on the foundation with gold, silver, costly stones, wood, hay, or stubble;
Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè aèmboè Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa, baná mdip ce mi ke fa beèe ryoèñ mi be fúú enje yeâ nyoèr goèr seê.”	"He who believes in me, as the Scripture has said, from within him will flow rivers of living water."""
Yá ka neè aèmboè Nyúè ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe mo', a ker ce jar neè beèe moè'. E ce jar neè beèe ce a gweè, a ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè weèe, ce weèe aè ka' ku ce jáèr ba njep yi nduunjïì. Yi ka' tá ba wa' ka' baná e be faèr weèe foñ.	See then the goodness and severity of God. Toward those who fell, severity; but toward you, goodness, if you continue in his goodness; otherwise you also will be cut off.
Laèa ba blaâa bboèñboñ ce aède' ñwáè moè' jaasïì ka', tá rïìtu yi bo koo beèe ce a kani liseèe rfaè'. Rïìtu yi be koo woweèe njobeè' woweèe a yá yuu bebep ce aède' a suñ aèmboè seèe ka'.	and soundness of speech that can't be condemned; that he who opposes you may be ashamed, having no evil thing to say about us.
E gwè embe ce a kwe kaʼ, seemòʼ e yu ŋwɛ̀ rbʉ̀.	She fell from the tree and didnʼt die, maybe she is a witch.
Beèe a m báèáñger seê, a ce laèa enáê, “E geèe buu wááwá yáánïì; e geèe mnfuñtuè' a ce yu' buu, blúr a ce laèa.”	"They were astonished beyond measure, saying, ""He has done all things well. He makes even the deaf hear, and the mute speak!"""
Ndàmbàʼ yu nè ye ba à ncʉʼ.	Tobacco to him is a strong habit.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa wa'a, bfúr a ká' a ce suñ ená ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu ce Jisoès aè m koèñ ye goèr naè be keè lá kwe ka'. Jisoès aè m banïì laa ba ená e be keè kwe ka' ka'. E m banïì laa ba enáê, “M ka' koñ ená e ku cu nteèe caar tá m ke kúti, yo enjo ba ká? Vúè yo ba fa máâ mbuèu.”	"This saying therefore went out among the brothers, that this disciple wouldn't die. Yet Jesus didn't say to him that he wouldn't die, but, ""If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you?"""
E lɛ̀ mbàa njep bàa.	He has put money in the bag.
Ŋgàa ncir a kaʼ koo wɛ̀, à borsì nyor tɛ a du nè wɛ̀ fàdìʼ ce woowèe a kòŋ.	If police men arrest you, calm down and let them take you where they want to.
Tetèr à barni mɛ̀ à cɛ̀ʼ.	A caterpillar has stuck on my dress.
A m fa ñger ená nyaèa ca ma' bïìr a beèe Nyúè, so woweèe. A m ker fa ñger ená e sa' beèe ce a ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá, a ce cu aè mntáè' ce vi yu aè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na.	It was given to him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them. Authority over every tribe, people, language, and nation was given to him.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ker ba btu embe cor ba cor wááwá, a yá ená yi yu boèñboñ aè rce beèe moè' efa waâp mú, tá a bo tuu woweèe a Pol weèe aè rla' Antïìyoèk. Woweèe a m ce Judaès ce li rlii mo' li m ba ená Baèsabaès, ker ba Silaès. Woweèe a m ba boo mlii aè mú bfúr.	Then it seemed good to the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to choose men out of their company, and send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas: Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, chief men among the brothers.
M ce suñ weèe ená AÈlajaè aè vúè wáá, beèe a rïìñ ye ka', a ku ce geèe buu ce a m ce koèñ aè rgeèe neè ye. Yi yu ená Muu Ñwáè ye ye be yá ñgá' mbe waâp mmboè.”	"but I tell you that Elijah has come already, and they didn't recognize him, but did to him whatever they wanted to. Even so the Son of Man will also suffer by them."""
Wáè geèe woweèe a ba beèe ce aè ce sa' woweèe aè yaèp ñkúú, a ker gee woweèe a ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì tá a bo faè' neè Nyúè. Woweèe a be sa' beèe enjep ñgoèñ na.”	"and made us kings and priests to our God, and we will reign on earth."""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mncir ce Musïìs aè m vúè aègho naè, ñwáè aè m ka' bú' mncir anaè, beèe a mntaar káè beèe a mmbaa áè, a m ka' táá njïìnsa' ená a yá ñgaèñ aè gee yuu ce ncir yi kani, baná a be koosimnse efa ryú ñwáè anaè ka'.	A man who disregards Moses' law dies without compassion on the word of two or three witnesses.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rgeèe ba yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ, baná ñgaèñ be rïìñ ená yuu ce m ce yá'ni yi loè ba ese Nyúè, káè m ce laèa ba aè ya ñger lá.	If anyone desires to do his will, he will know about the teaching, whether it is from God, or if I am speaking from myself.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè seèe, Yú' Rara yi geèe seèe aè ce keè' ba ená Nyúè be loèr seèe aèmboè beâe byáánïì a yeâ bsii njobeè' seèe aè byemi neè Jisos Kraêis.	For we, through the Spirit, by faith wait for the hope of righteousness.
Joân aè m ba neè laa neè Hároèd enáê, “Ncir yi byemi ená aè fap ñgwa nfúroè, beesi aè yoè ka'.”	"For John said to him, ""It is not lawful for you to have her."""
Beèe ce a m yúshi yoè beèe a ker yúshi yo ñgaâa ncep ntuu, bláá vi láñ naè, a beèe ce wáè fa bláá neè woweèe ená a no. Yu beèe ce a ba no bláá anaè ghup.”	"For they poured out the blood of the saints and the prophets, and you have given them blood to drink. They deserve this."""
aèmboè aè bfeè' mjeèe kyeèe ba nto'. AÈ ka' ba embenjïì ca, e fa woweèe ñgaâa nsa' mnsa', woweèe a sa' caar a ba' mbe nfeè' yïì Saâmwáèl ce e m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	After these things he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet.
Musïìs aè m geèe rfaè' neè beèe Nyúè neè mini-ñwáè. E m geèe rfaè' ca wa'a a ku ba ba ñwáè rfaè' neè Nyúè. Li rfaè' anaè li m táá ba aètu yuu ce Nyúè aè m bii ka' geèe tá beèe a rïîñ.	Moses indeed was faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were afterward to be spoken,
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè neè ntee tú' wa'a, Pol ba Silaès a ce geèe rloo a ce yáá byáá neè Nyúè, ñgaâa shañ a cu a ce yu'shi.	But about midnight Paul and Silas were praying and singing hymns to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
Weèr aè ka' ce yááti aèmboè beèe ce btu vi ce kar embo wa'a, baná weèr yu wa'a njo' Nyúè. Weèr aè ka' ba beèe ce yap tu yi yu mbo, baná weèr yu wa'a njo' weèe.	For if we are beside ourselves, it is for God. Or if we are of sober mind, it is for you.
E mɛ̀r ŋgar njoʼ e ba koŋ à rmà kaʼ.	He has set back the gun because he did not want to shoot.
E ba ba à rvʉ̀ kaʼ, e ku vʉ njobèʼ mɛ̀ làa enɛ e vʉ̂.	He wouldnʼt have come, he has just come because I said he should come.
a ce laèa enáê, “Yi yu wa'a. Nyúè a ñwáè ce beèe a ba yoèñshi, kuè'si. E yu ñwáè ce e túr bfee wááwá. Beèe a ba yoèñshi ye aè nfeè' wááwá, yu'ni neè ye, keèr rïìñ ená e túr ñger wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.”	"saying, ""Amen! Blessing, glory, wisdom, thanksgiving, honor, power, and might, be to our God forever and ever! Amen."""
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè moè' yu ñwáâ nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka', ka' ñwáè moè'sir.	"As it is written, ""There is no one righteous; no, not one."
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè Nyúè, ke' ce tarni ka', e ka' laa neè rtuèu ca enáê, ‘Rtuèu caê, co'ti embo naè, du gwe njep rdip rgoèr’, baná yi be kuè ba wa'a.	For most certainly I tell you, whoever may tell this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' and doesn't doubt in his heart, but believes that what he says is happening; he shall have whatever he says.
Weèe aè ka' du niñ aè rla' mo', káè yu mbe lïû fá áè, beâe aèfo a ka' koni weèe, weèe ye yuu ce a ka' fa weèe.	Into whatever city you enter, and they receive you, eat the things that are set before you.
Ma kúr Jus a ka' yu' ená Jisoès yu aè rla' anaè, a natïì a vúê. Woweèe a m vúè tá a bo kuè yá ba Jisoès caè'caè' ka', a m koèñ foñ aè ryá Lasoèroès ce Jisoès aè m fúr efa rkwe naè.	A large crowd therefore of the Jews learned that he was there, and they came, not for Jesus' sake only, but that they might see Lazarus also, whom he had raised from the dead.
Nyúè aè ka' kuèu ñgoèñ, túè' aè sii caar a ba' aè nyúè taar.	It was now about the sixth hour, and darkness came over the whole land until the ninth hour.
Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè beèe wááwá aè ba moè'sir foñ. Yu ye ce e túr ñger mbenduè beèe wááwá, aè ba ye ce e loèr beèe wááwá a ce geèe mi mfaè' aègho, a ker ba foñ njep beèe wááwá.	one God and Father of all, who is over all, and through all, and in us all.
Mboè bjar vi wááwá a ce cu aèfa seèe woweèe a? Baná ñwáè ca aè geèe bfee ca ba ñger ca efá?”	"Aren't all of his sisters with us? Where then did this man get all of these things?"""
“M ce koosimnse neè beèe ca seê, weèr woweèe aè cu aè mnoâñ btaar, woweèe a ke' koni yuu ye ka'.	"I have compassion on the multitude, because they have stayed with me now three days, and have nothing to eat.
Mark	Maêk	8	3	M ka' kúsi woweèe aè mlaè' neè njeè, woweèe a du gwe njeè aè nduunjïì. Weèe mo' efa waâp mú a vúè efa njïìsaèp seê.”	If I send them away fasting to their home, they will faint on the way, for some of them have come a long way."
Ñwáè wááwá be kuè fúú efa rkwe aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè lá. Jisos Kraâis a ñwáè ce e m fúú efa rkwe entombïì. Be keè ba aè nfeè' ce Jisos Kraâis aè kúti naè, tá yïì beèe a fúú efa rkwe.	But each in his own order: Christ the first fruits, then those who are Christ's, at his coming.
Wèr à yɛ àmbò Nfò ce dòo mutù, wèr à ba nè rghaʼnì ŋwɛ̀.	When we saw Nfor driving a car, we were surprised.
Nyúè aè m túr ntee boèñboñ neè weèr, a fa weèr rfaè' ená weèr gee buu ca neè beèe. Yi ka' ba wa'a, weèr aè ce geèe li, a ke' ce koosi bsáè ka'.	Therefore seeing we have this ministry, even as we obtained mercy, we don't faint.
Weèe rïìñ weená byepkúú a m ba aè to' Isráèl aè nfeè' yïì AÈlajaè seê, mbe nfeè' ce mbeèñ aè m gweè ka' aè bfeâ' btaar ba nto', njeè aè koo aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoâñ Isráèl aè nfeè' anaè naè.	But truly I tell you, there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up three years and six months, when a great famine came over all the land.
Ka' m yu ñwáâ ñká' efa múè beèe Nyúè wa'a, e fa máè rfaè' ca ená m fe'shi neè beèe enje jáá wááwá, suñ woweèe buu bboèñboñ ce vi loè ese Kraêis, ce yu buu ce aède' ñwáè riñ ka'.	To me, the very least of all saints, was this grace given, to preach to the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of Christ,
a bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu muu weèe a? Yi yu mini ená e m feèp ká' embe nfeè' a m bi ye a? E geèe eká a ka' ce yá buu?”	"and asked them, ""Is this your son, who you say was born blind? How then does he now see?"""
Baná wáâ ñwáè ce aè ce sa' beèe mo', mboè wáè rïìñ wáná aède' aè fúr yo tu efa mnsa' Nyúè ka' a? Wáè ka' laèa ená woweèe a geèe buu bbebep, baná wáè ce sa' yoè nyor foñ njobeè' wáè ku ce geèe ba njáèá buu ce woweèe a ce geèe.	Therefore you are without excuse, O man, whoever you are who judge. For in that which you judge another, you condemn yourself. For you who judge practice the same things.
A yuu ce m ce suñ weèe yuu mini, weèe aè ce byemi neè máè ka'.	But because I tell the truth, you don't believe me.
E m fuñ wa' aè mnoèñ aèñgoo, ntee yi yañ Poêl, e karsïì nyor a ke' ye, a laa neè yú' ce yi m ba njep ye anaè enáê, “M ce laèa neè wáè aè rlii Jisos Kraâis ená aè fúú enjep ye.” E ka' laèa wa'a, yú' anaè yi ku fúú aè nfeè' anaè.	"She was doing this for many days. But Paul, becoming greatly annoyed, turned and said to the spirit, ""I command you in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her!"" It came out that very hour."
Bfúr weêr, baná weèe fúr mmbañruè saèambaê, efa weâe mú ce yap ñgeèe yi yu yáánïì, woweèe a ruusïì neè Yú' Rara, a ker riñ buu, tá weèr bo fa rfaè' ca mbe waâp mmboè,	Therefore select from among you, brothers, seven men of good report, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business.
Túè' aè ka' raa, Joân aè yá aèmboè Jisoès ce vúè aè ryá ye, a laa enáê, “Yá neè Muu Njeèe Nyúè ce e be siñsi buu bbebep enjep ñgoèñ.	"The next day, he saw Jesus coming to him, and said, ""Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world!"
Jus a vú a sir ye a kaari a tarte, a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr be keè' duè baè' ba fá, tá aè ka' suñ weèr njáèá ñwáè ce aè yu? Wáè ka' ba Kraêis, ce yu ñwáè rjaè' ce Nyúè aè m kaè'ni ená e be tuu naè, aè suñ weèr rara.”	"The Jews therefore came around him and said to him, ""How long will you hold us in suspense? If you are the Christ, tell us plainly."""
E ka' ye, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Buu ca yu buu ce máè m suñ weèe aè nfeè' ce máè m ku bii weèe seèe naè. Máè m laèa máná buu wááwá ce a sañ aèmboè máè mbe ñwaâ' mncir Musïìs, ba mbe mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, ker ba mbe mñwaâ' byáá vi be kuè ghááte njo.”	"He said to them, ""This is what I told you, while I was still with you, that all things which are written in the law of Moses, the prophets, and the psalms, concerning me must be fulfilled."""
E m geèe wa'a tá beèe a bo roèo ye, ce ghaèashi ená káè seemoè' a be yá ye lá. Geewa'a, Nyúè yu aènjïìsaèp ese ñwáè moè' efa seèe ka'.	that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us.
Baná aè rgeèe tá weèe bo rïìñ ená Muu Ñwáè túr ñger njep ñgoèñ aè rfoèosi beèe efa yaèp buu bbebep.” E laa neè ñwáè yañ ca enáê, “Naèti mbekïì, lor yo keèñ, du aè laè'.”	"But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins..."" (then he said to the paralytic), ""Get up, and take up your mat, and go up to your house."""
M ce loo máná Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe a ntee boèñboñ.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Amen.
M ku ce koèñ aè rtuu bfúr ca neè weèe tá naèatu ce weèr ce naèa neè weèe naè bo bú aè cicïì ka'. M ce tuu woweèe tá weèe bo tami nyor aèmboè máè m laèa naè,	But I have sent the brothers that our boasting on your behalf may not be in vain in this respect, that, just as I said, you may be prepared,
Woweèe a suñ ñgaâa cor aèmboè lo rkoèñnïì. Be ba yuu boèñboñ ce wáè ka' daasi woweèe aè njáèá njïì ce e yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	They have testified about your love before the assembly. You will do well to send them forward on their journey in a way worthy of God,
Woweèe a naètïû aè ncuâu nsheè cárcár seê, neè bwáp-ñwáè ker ba neè rlu'shïì- ñwáè, a cañ a du aè rsuñ ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu.	They departed quickly from the tomb with fear and great joy, and ran to bring his disciples word.
Nyor aè bep Jisoès aè ryá njáèá nteèe-tu ca. E fyá' woweèe aè rshentee, a laa neè ñwáè yañ caè enáê, “Maè' lo rkoo kuèyáá.” E ma', li kútïì boèñboñ.	"When he had looked around at them with anger, being grieved at the hardening of their hearts, he said to the man, ""Stretch out your hand."" He stretched it out, and his hand was restored as healthy as the other."
E m ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “To' yi be maè' bïìr a to' mo', tá ñkúú moè' ma' bïìr a moè'.	"Then he said to them, ""Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom."
Weèr ce sañ neè weèe ce weèe yu beèe ce Nyúè aè ce, a ce cu aè rla' Koèlosïì, weèe Jisoès weèe aè ba aèbee, weèe aè ce duè a yeâ mbuèu neè ntee mo'sir. Weèr ce loo neè Nyúè ce e yu yeèr ta ená e túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	to the saints and faithful brothers in Christ at Colossae: Grace to you and peace from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Mnoèñ vi ka' caèa ntuunfu, Jisoès aè lor Pitaè ba Jáêms, ker ba Joân, a ko' a woweèe mbe rtuâu rsaèsap, aè ku ba woweèe mbo caè'caè'. A m baè' mbo, Jisoès aè kupseè a ba aè njáâá jáá.	After six days Jesus took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up onto a high mountain privately by themselves, and he was changed into another form in front of them.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Wa byee yu ená m gee yuu ce Nyúè ce e m tuu máè koèñ, ker misi rfaè' ce e m fa neè máè.	"Jesus said to them, ""My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work."
aè fe'shi blaâa Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá, káè yu aè nfeâ' mbembep áè, káè yu a nfeâ' mboèñmboñ áè, geèe tá woweèe a riñ yaèp buu bbebep, lapni woweèe, fa woweèe ñger, yá'ni woweèe neè ntee múfáèá.	preach the word; be urgent in season and out of season; reprove, rebuke, and exhort, with all patience and teaching.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M yu byee ce e aè ryoèñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' vú yá máè, aède' njeè ker yañ ye ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè aède' ntee yi ker yuushi ye ka'.	"Jesus said to them, ""I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will not be hungry, and he who believes in me will never be thirsty."
Yú' anaè yi waa, e ker gwe kaè', yi fúú enjep ye, e noñ aèmboè gúèú ñwáè wa'a. Weèe mo' a ce laèa ená e kwe.	"Having cried out, and convulsed greatly, it came out of him. The boy became like one dead; so much that most of them said, ""He is dead."""
Buu moè' ce Jisoès aè m geèe vi yu goèr seê. A m ba sañ buu ca wááwá, m kwaè' máná ñgoèñ ca yi m ba túr dïì' aè rláè mñwaè' ce a sañ buu anaè mbo ka'.	There are also many other things which Jesus did, which if they would all be written, I suppose that even the world itself wouldn't have room for the books that would be written.
Ku' beèe ce a m ba aèfo ker ba ñgaâa kansuèr a ka' yu', ntee yi fúú woweèe.	The multitude and the rulers of the city were troubled when they heard these things.
Nyúè yu mini. Yu ye ce e ká' weèe ená weèe bo ba aèbee weèe muu yïì ce Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe.	God is faithful, through whom you were called into the fellowship of his Son, Jesus Christ, our Lord.
Pol weèe a m loèr nfeè' a cu aèfo a ce feè'shi aèmboè Tataê, neè ntee-ñwáè. Tata aè m fa woweèe ñger, woweèe a duñshïì mncoèo, a gee buu bbáèá aè rduèñshi ená yuu ce woweèe a m ce feè'shi aèmboè rboâñ Nyúè yi yu mini.	Therefore they stayed there a long time, speaking boldly in the Lord, who testified to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to be done by their hands.
Máè yá máná aède' seèe be'nïì ñgá' ce seèe ce yá seè'ni na aè foèo ce seèe be keè sa' na ka'.	For I consider that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which will be revealed toward us.
Kwaè'shi ka neè ená waè' yi yu yáánïì ená njeñwáè gee rloo neè Nyúè ce e señ rtaa mbe tuè ka' lá.	Judge for yourselves. Is it appropriate that a woman pray to God unveiled?
Mɛ̀ ba ce kèʼ wɛ̀ tɛ sò bo dù.	I was waiting for you so that we can go together.
Beèe embe ntáè' moè'sir ce a m fa woweèe ncoèo anaè a m ba ncúèkïì-ncoèp- baa-aè-rrúèú. Mntáè' anaè vi m ba aè njáèá enáê: ntáè' Judaè, ntáè' Rubáèn, ntáè' Gaêd,	of the tribe of Judah were sealed twelve thousand, of the tribe of Reuben twelve thousand, of the tribe of Gad twelve thousand,
Beèe ca a ce laèa bebep aèmboè buu ce woweèe a rïìñ ka'. Woweèe a ce geèe ñgeèe blúr a ba aèmboè mnyaâa aè rïìñ ce beèe a ke koo, yú naè. Woweèe a be bepsi beèe mo' wa'a, bep foñ njep múè njáèá ñgeèe anaè, loè kwe bú aè cicïì.	But these, as unreasoning creatures, born natural animals to be taken and destroyed, speaking evil in matters about which they are ignorant, will in their destroying surely be destroyed,
Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa yuu a kuu ye. E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' ce fuñ aè ntee rïìñ a ce laèa enáê, ‘Kupshi neè nduunjïì neè Tataê, nashi tá yi ba kuèyáá.’ ”	"For this is he who was spoken of by Isaiah the prophet, saying, ""The voice of one crying in the wilderness, make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight."""
Máè ka' keèr fyá' a yá ku' beèe ce aède' ñwáè be' ka'. Beèe anaè aè m ba beèe efa bto' jáá jáèá jáá, ba mntáè' jáá jáèá jáá, ce a m ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá enjep ñgoèñ na wáá. Woweèe a m táá kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè' ba Muu Njeèe, a yar bcáâ' bbúú, a túr bbaèp mtáá aè mmboè.	After these things I looked, and behold, a great multitude, which no man could number, out of every nation and of all tribes, peoples, and languages, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, dressed in white robes, with palm branches in their hands.
Jus a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr rïìñ seè'ni werná yú' nyúèrkaè' yi yu njep wáè. To Abraèham aè m kwe, ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a kweñgeèr foñ. Wáè ka' ce laèa ená ñwáè aè ka' yu' yuu ce aè ce laèa ce geèe yi, rkwe li ke' joo ye ka' aè njáâá ká?	"Then the Jews said to him, ""Now we know that you have a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets; and you say, 'If a man keeps my word, he will never taste of death.'"
Rboâñtu li yu neè ñwáè ce e ce tarni máè tarni ka'.”	"Blessed is he who is not offended by me."""
Ŋkar zhìi à sòrti efa mnsaʼ cà.	His friend is free from that case.
E lor ndoñ, a yoñshi Nyúè, a fa neè woweèe, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè wááwá no mruè' enjep ndoñ na.	"He took the cup, gave thanks, and gave to them, saying, ""All of you drink it,"
Wee weèe foñ aè ba jaè' aè rloo neè weèr. Weèe aè ka' loo, baná beèe magoèr a be yoèñshi Nyúè njo' yuu boèñboñ ce Nyúè aè yu' miseèe mloo, a geèe neè weèr.	you also helping together on our behalf by your supplication; that, for the gift bestowed on us by means of many, thanks may be given by many persons on your behalf.
Baná weèr aè riñ neè mini-ñwáè ená blaèa ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m feè'shi naè vi yu mini njobeè' buu ce weèr aè yá neè mer mmir. Weèe aè ba yu' blaèa ca boèñboñ, njobeè' vi yu aèmboè lam ce e raa neètú', ku raa du baè' aè nfeè' ce túè' be raa naè. Be ba aè nfeè' ce mbeèr aè loè naè, tá weèe yá rraa njep weâe mntee.	We have the more sure word of prophecy; and you do well that you heed it, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns, and the morning star arises in your hearts:
Boo waê, weèe fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yuu yáánïì, baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáâ nyáánïì aèmboè Kraâis yu ñwáè nyáánïì.	Little children, let no one lead you astray. He who does righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous.
Weèe rïìñ nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m láè mncir a duñshi yi foèo. E m sañ mncir mbe luâr mbáèmbár a fa neè Musïìs. E ka' ce vúè neè mncir ca, rraa Nyúè li raa a yeâ bsii seê, ce aède' beèe Isráèl a m ba fyá' neè mmir ka'. Ka' rraa anaè li m loè a ker ce raa aèmboè li m ce raa naè ka' wa'a. AÈmboè yi yu seè'ni ená rsa' rrúèú ce li m ce vúè ba neè rkwe li m ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè na,	But if the service of death, written engraved on stones, came with glory, so that the children of Israel could not look steadfastly on the face of Moses for the glory of his face; which was passing away:
Nsuñ mboèñmboñ moè' ce e yu mini ker ba aègho caa efa yïì máè m suñ weèe naè ka'. Beèe mo' a ce jepsi weèe, a ce koèñ ená a ba kupse nsuñ mboèñmboñ ce e yu aèmboè Jisos Kraêis.	"and there isn't another ""good news."" Only there are some who trouble you, and want to pervert the Good News of Christ."
E nyòʼ ye njep nshè.	He has pressed him on the ground.
Kúr beèe mo' ce a m ba aèfo a m yu' njeèndoñ anaè a laa ená mbeèñ aè wañger. Beèe mo' a laa yap ená ncïìndap Nyúè aè laèa yuu neè ye.	"The multitude therefore, who stood by and heard it, said that it had thundered. Others said, ""An angel has spoken to him."""
yi laa enáê, ‘M be kúti mbe ndaèp ce máè m fúú embo naè.’ Yi ce kúti, yá ndap anaè ba mboèmmbo, a yáêr, kupshi, e ce raa.	Then he says, 'I will return into my house from which I came out,' and when he has come back, he finds it empty, swept, and put in order.
Tàta à m̀ A ba muuŋkʉ kɛʼ à muuŋkɛʼ.	Tata was an orphan from childhood.
E tuŋ nshe nè soo.	She has dug the ground with a hoe.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “To a máè ce máè ce weèe beèe ncoèp-baa-aè- rrúèú? Ka' yi yu wa'a, moè' efa weâe mú yu nyúèrkaè'.”	"Jesus answered them, ""Didn't I choose you, the twelve, and one of you is a devil?"""
a waa, a laa enáê, “Jisoès, Muu Nyúè embe buèu, yuu ce soè túr a ká? M ce loo wáè aè rlii Nyúè ená aè fa fa máè ñgá' ka'.”	"and crying out with a loud voice, he said, ""What have I to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I adjure you by God, don't torment me."""
Mɛ̀ laa enɛ laŋ, wee ye vʉ bsip.	I have said that the two of you should come.
“E laèa wa'a njoká? E bepsi rlii Nyúè. Ñwáè ce aède' e foosïì beèe efa buu bbebep caa efa Nyúè, a nda?”	Why does this man speak blasphemies like that? Who can forgive sins but God alone?
Máè ka' duè neè ye mbo, a yá máná e m geèe yuu mo' ce aède' a m ba yú ye káè fa ye mbe shañ ka'. Yuu ce a m ce laèa aèmboè ye aè m ba ba buu ce a m ce bipshi neè ye kuu yap ncir.	I found him to be accused about questions of their law, but not to be charged with anything worthy of death or of imprisonment.
Nfúraè, m ce loo wáè aè rlii Tata máná aè ja' máè, gee yuu boèñboñ ca neè máè. Geèe wa' njobeè' Jisos Kraêis, tá ya ntee yi bo keèr tap.	Yes, brother, let me have joy from you in the Lord. Refresh my heart in the Lord.
Mɛ̀ lɛ̀ mrùʼ njoo.	I have kept wine inside.
AÈ ba aè nfeè' ce máè ba yu' aèmboè wáè caè'ni máè naè, muu enjep máâ rbúè aè karsïì nyor neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	For behold, when the voice of your greeting came into my ears, the baby leaped in my womb for joy!
Wèr à dù ba à cùu yoo.	We have considered your suggestion.
Mmbòʼ mi ke zhʉ ba à mŋwɛ̀ɛ.	Pumpkins bear but on creeping stems.
Seèe rïìñ ená aède' ñwáè ce e yu muu Nyúè ku ce geèe yuu bebep ka', njobeè' Muu Nyúè ce keè'ni ye. AÈtaè Sataèn joo ñgaèñ ka'.	We know that whoever is born of God doesn't sin, but he who was born of God keeps himself, and the evil one doesn't touch him.
Geewa'a aè m ba efa rkáè' Nyúè aè boo mbañruèñwáè ba njeñwáè.	But from the beginning of the creation, God made them male and female.
Beèe a m laèa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân ba ñgaâa yá'ni buu beèe Farïìsi, a ke jïì mdip, ce geèe rloo aè nfeè' wááwá, geewa'a ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a ce yeñger yap ker ce no buu.”	"They said to him, ""Why do John's disciples often fast and pray, likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees, but yours eat and drink?"""
E laa neè beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba beèe ce a m ba btu neè beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè, ba bleebeèe ce a woweèe a m vúè aè rkoo ye naè enáê, “Weèe aè vúè aè rkoo máè neè bsaè' ba mmbaèñ aèmboè m yu lá nyáèá wa'a njoká?	"Jesus said to the chief priests, captains of the temple, and elders, who had come against him, ""Have you come out as against a robber, with swords and clubs?"
Bfúr viseèe ca a so ye njo' bláá Muu Njeèe ker ba njobeè' blaâa Nyúè ce woweèe a m ce suñ beèe. Woweèe a m tami nyor ená aè ka' ba rkwe baná woweèe a be kwe njo' Jisos Kraêis.	They overcame him because of the Lamb's blood, and because of the word of their testimony. They didn't love their life, even to death.
Bkar waê, yuu ce m ce sañ neè weèe ená weèe gee na, yu yuu fi ka', yu yuu rúèú ce a m laèa neè weèe efa rkáè'. Yuu rúèú ca yu nlaèa ce weèe aè m yu' wáá.	Brothers, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment which you had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word which you heard from the beginning.
Woweèe a m yu' aèmboè woweèe a ce laèa bli ce woweèe a m yá'ni ka', a ce ku'si Nyúè. Pitaè aè laêa enáê,	For they heard them speaking in other languages and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,
A mboè Nyúè aè m geèe buu ce e m kupshi a lá efa rkáè' wa'a, buu anaè aè geetïì aè nfeè' ce e m tuu Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê.	according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord;
Yuu mo' yi yu ce a tá'shi, ce yi be keè buu efa ryááti aèwañ ka'. Yuu mo' yi yu ce a súèti, ce beèe a be keè buu efa rrïìñ ka'.	But there is nothing covered up, that will not be revealed, nor hidden, that will not be known.
Mnoèñ vi ka' caâa btaar, e ká' beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè Jus ce aè rla' Ruêm. Woweèe a ka' vúè, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè beèe, ka' máè m geèe faèa moè' neè yïìseèe beèe káè ma' ndeèe to' ce viseèe btarkú a m láè neè seèe naè ka' wa'a, a ku koo máè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a fa mbe mmbo beèe ñkwe Ruêm.	"It happened that after three days Paul called together those who were the leaders of the Jews. When they had come together, he said to them, ""I, brothers, though I had done nothing against the people, or the customs of our fathers, still was delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,"
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená Kraâis anaè be yá ñgá', mnoèñ vi ba btaar, tá e fúú efa rkwe,	"He said to them, ""Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day,"
Ñwáè nsuu aè ker tuu ñwáè rfaè' moè', woweèe a ker koo a lïîp, a to' tu, a koosi ye rïìtu.	Again, he sent another servant to them; and they threw stones at him, wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully treated.
Fa mɛ̀ ntaaŋguu tɛ m̀ tôo.	Give me firewood to burn.
Beèe ce a ka' fa' rfaè' bdikïìn ca boèñboñ, baná a be naèa woweèe mbekïì, woweèe a ce laèa aèmboè rbyemïì ce e neè Jisos Kraêis, laa neè ñger-ñwáè.	For those who have served well gain for themselves a good standing, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.
Yá neè aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr. Abraèham ce e m ba taèr beâe aè to' Isráèl aè m loèr buu ce e m koo aè ñkúè bïìr a gaèp bdïì' rúêú, a lor dïû' mo'sir a fa neè Máèlkisidáèk.	Now consider how great this man was, to whom even Abraham, the patriarch, gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
Ñwáè fa kuè ce kwaè'shi ba aèmboè yi tu ka', ñwáè wááwá kwa'shi aèmboè beèe mo' foñ.	each of you not just looking to his own things, but each of you also to the things of others.
Ŋkaa à koʼ mbe ce.	The monkey has climbed on the tree.
Yàa taa e ke yɛ rlir.	My father is a witch person.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè beèe ce a foèosi ba neè mncir naè, ndoèo yu mbe waâp tuè, njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' tá yu'ni neè mncir wááwá ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' mncir ka', baná ndoèo aè co' ye.”	"For as many as are of the works of the law are under a curse. For it is written, ""Cursed is everyone who doesn't continue in all things that are written in the book of the law, to do them."""
Baná weèe gee neè beèe moè' aèmboè weèe ce koèñ ená a gee neè weèe.	"As you would like people to do to you, do exactly so to them.
Luke	Luêk	6	32	Weèe ka' ku koñ ba beèe ce a koèñ weèe, a yoñshïì weèe aè njáâá ká? To ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep foñ a koèñ beèe ce a koèñ woweèe.	If you love those who love you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners love those who love them.
Luke	Luêk	6	33	Weèe ka' ku gee buu bboèñboñ ba neè beèe ce a ke geèe buu bboèñboñ neè weèe, a yoñshïì weèe aè njáâá ká? To ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a ke geèe wa' foñ.	If you do good to those who do good to you, what credit is that to you? For even sinners do the same.
Luke	Luêk	6	34	Weèe ka' ku ce foèosi buu ba neè beèe ce weèe ce kwaè'shi ená a be kúsi buu anaè neè weèe, a yoñshïì weèe aè njáâá ká? To ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a ke foèosi buu neè ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, tá a bo fúú koo yaèp buu ce a m foèosi anaè.	If you lend to those from whom you hope to receive, what credit is that to you? Even sinners lend to sinners, to receive back as much.
Luke	Luêk	6	35	Weèe aè ba koñ yeè beèe ce a baèa weèe, geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè woweèe. Ñwáè aè ka' foosi yuu, e fa keèr ce keè' ená a be kúsi neè ye ka'. Weèe ka' gee wa' baná wee blaè' vi be ba goèr, tá weèe ba boo Nyúè embe buèu njobeè' e ke geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beâe bbebep ker ba neè beèe ce a ke yoèñshi yap yu ñwáè ka'.	But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, expecting nothing back; and your reward will be great, and you will be children of the Most High; for he is kind toward the unthankful and evil.
Luke	Luêk	6	36	Koosi neè mnse neè beèe aèmboè yeè Ta Nyúè e ke koosi naè.	Therefore be merciful, even as your Father is also merciful.
Luke	Luêk	6	37	“Weèe fa sa' beèe mo' ka', tá a bo sa' weèe ka'. Weèe fa bepsi beèe mo' ka', tá a bo bepsi weèe ka'. Weèe foosi beèe mo' tá a bo foèosi weèe foñ.	Don't judge, and you won't be judged. Don't condemn, and you won't be condemned. Set free, and you will be set free.
Luke	Luêk	6	38	Weèe fa, tá a bo fa weèe foñ. A be feè' tá yi ruu boèñboñ, a ciishi tá yi ruu baèati tá a fa njep yo baèa. Yuu ce weèe ka' fe' buu njo, ku ba yi ce a be feè' njo kúsi neè weèe.”	Give, and it will be given to you: good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, will be given to you. For with the same measure you measure it will be measured back to you."""
Weèe aè ka' ce bipshi buu neè weèr kuu yuu boèñboñ ce weèr aè geèe neè ñwáè ce e kepñger na, ená e geèe eká a ka' ce jáèr lá,	if we are examined today concerning a good deed done to a crippled man, by what means this man has been healed,
Joân aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, weèr aè mú yá ñwáè moè' e ce fúshi byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe fa wáâ rlii. Weèr aè laa neè ye ená e fa keèr geèe wa' ka' njobeè' e yu mo' efa seâe mú ka'.”	"John said to him, ""Teacher, we saw someone who doesn't follow us casting out demons in your name; and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow us."""
e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñkoosimnse ce e yu njep máâ ntee yu ba yïì ce aède' e ku yú máè. Cu neè mbena tá seèe ce keè'ni.”	"Then he said to them, ""My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, even to death. Stay here, and watch with me."""
Beâe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ker ba beèe ce a ce sa' woweèe a rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce Jisoès yu ka'. A m beè' blaâa Nyúè ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m sañ aè mmbomntaa Nyúè wááwá, woweèe a yu' a riñ vi ka'. AÈmboè yi yu wa' naè, yuu ce a m beè' anaè yi m ku ghááte mbe nfeè' ce a m sa' vi mnsa' a teni ená a yú ye naè.	For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, because they didn't know him, nor the voices of the prophets which are read every Sabbath, fulfilled them by condemning him.
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Ncoèo ce aède' aè duñshïì tá weèr bo yá, byemi neè wáè yu ká?	"They said therefore to him, ""What then do you do for a sign, that we may see, and believe you? What work do you do?"
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè rkoèñnïì ce e neè nfúr moè' ce e byemi neè Jisoès, mbuèu moè' ker ba neè weèr aè rsañ neè weèe aèmboè li ka' njobeè' Nyúè aè yá'ni weèe njáèá rkoèñnïì ca wáá.	But concerning brotherly love, you have no need that one write to you. For you yourselves are taught by God to love one another,
Visò bkuu vi sàʼŋger e.	Our bed has scattered.
Mɛ̀ suŋ ye mɛnɛ m̀ be dù kaʼ.	I have told him that I will not go.
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Mdip ce wáè yá ma kwaèraè caè aè cu mbetar mo naè, mi táá aètu ku' beâe aè mntáè' wááwá aè bto' wááwá ce a ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá.	"He said to me, ""The waters which you saw, where the prostitute sits, are peoples, multitudes, nations, and languages."
Ñwáè moè' ka' vú aè ryá weèe, ke' ce yá'ni ba njáèá ryá'nïì ca ka', weèe fa byemi tá e niñ mbe weâe ndaèp ka', fa fa neè ye bo foñ ka'.	If anyone comes to you, and doesn't bring this teaching, don't receive him into your house, and don't welcome him,
Jisoès aè m ce káè' li rfaè', a ba aèmboè bfeè' mntaar. Beèe a m ce kwaè'shi ená a ye muu Josáèf ce e m ba muu Hálïì.	Jesus himself, when he began to teach, was about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
Ñwáè ce e ka' koñ aè rfaè' neè máè, ñgaèñ vú fa máâ mbuèu. Faèdïì' ce m ka' ba, baná yaè ñwáè rfaè' be ba aèfo foñ. Ñwáè ce e ka' fa' neè máè baná yaè ta be naèa ye mbekïì.	If anyone serves me, let him follow me. Where I am, there will my servant also be. If anyone serves me, the Father will honor him.
Ca yi be caèa wáá, tá m kúti, baè'ri ndap Dávïìd ce e gweè. M be baè'ri ndap ce e saè'ñger na, geèe tá e ba aèmboè e m ba,	After these things I will return. I will again build the tabernacle of David, which has fallen. I will again build its ruins. I will set it up,
M ce kúti seè'ni duè yá ñwáè ce e m tuu máè. Ka' yi yu wa'a, moè' efa weèe aè be bipshi neè máè enáê, ‘AÈ ce duè ba fá lá?’ ka'.	But now I am going to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, 'Where are you going?'
Mbèŋ à ba gwè à mʉŋgàptʉʼ.	It rained early this morning.
Jisoès aè ku riñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “To' yi ka' gapni, ke' ba cuâu mo'sir ka', baná to' anaè yi be saè'ñger. Ndap ka' gapni, ke' ba cuâu mo'sir ka', baná ndap anaè be gweè.	"But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, ""Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to desolation. A house divided against itself falls."
Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir njobeè' weèe aè loèr ki ce a ke múè' ndap bfee, a du aègho. Weèe aè niñ mbo ka', a kani beèe ce a ce gheèter aè rniñ mbo naè efa rduè mbo.”	"Woe to you lawyers! For you took away the key of knowledge. You didn't enter in yourselves, and those who were entering in, you hindered."""
Woowèe a lii muu njep cɛ̀ʼ.	They have wrapped the baby in the cloth.
E lá' efa mmirloè, a waa fu', a laa neè rdip enáê, “Táá nyañ, fa cïì'ti ka'.” Fu' yi teetïì, ñgoèñ yi ba neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	"He awoke, and rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, ""Peace! Be still!"" The wind ceased, and there was a great calm."
Ŋgòŋ zhi bàŋ sèʼni njo fùp.	The world is now difficult because of poverty.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè seèe, beèe magoèr ca, ce a m byemi neè Nyúè na, a sïìr seèe a kaari a tarte a ce fyá' yuu ce seèe be geèe. Baná seèe ma' buu wááwá ce vi ce jepsi seèe, ker ba buu bbebep ce vi yu seèe njep bláá naè, kur ntee cañ mcañnïì ce Nyúè e koèñ ená seèe cañ naè.	Therefore let us also, seeing we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses, lay aside every weight and the sin which so easily entangles us, and let us run with patience the race that is set before us,
Máè laèa wa'a njobeè' beèe a ce laèa ená mñwaè' ce m ce sañ neè weèe vi tap, a ce' seê, máâ ba fa weâe mú, yááti aèmboè ñwáè ce e goè'si, la rfeè'shïì li túr ñger ka'.	"For, ""His letters,"" they say, ""are weighty and strong, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is despised."""
Máè ka' yu' njeèndoñ ca a karsi nyor tá m bo yá ñwáè ce e ce laèa. Máè ka' karsi nyor a yá mú njáèá btábuèr ce a ke tooshi blam mbo vi saèambaê. A m geèe mú btábuèr ca neè bco' ce a too ená guêl.	I turned to see the voice that spoke with me. Having turned, I saw seven golden lampstands.
Yi yu ená ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè Jus ghup yu ba ñwáè ce a ce yá ba neè mmir ka'. Búè ce yu búè mini aè bsii Nyúè yu ba yïì ce aè geèe ñwáè ka'.	For he is not a Jew who is one outwardly, neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh;
Beèe ce a m duè a Pol weèe aè m ba Soèpataè, muu yïì Pairuâs aè rla' Báèriyaè, ba AÈristakoès ba Sáèkunduâs aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè, ba Gayoâs aè rla' Dábeè, ba Timotïì, ba Tikikoès a Troâfimoès ce a m ba beâe aè ñgoâñ Áshaè.	These accompanied him as far as Asia: Sopater of Beroea; Aristarchus and Secundus of the Thessalonians; Gaius of Derbe; Timothy; and Tychicus and Trophimus of Asia.
Tá Nyúè ce e geèe weèe aè lá mi mmir mbenduè buu ce vi bii ka' koni gee tá weèe ce lu'shi seê, cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè njobeè' weèe aè byemi neè ye. E geèe wa'a, tá weèe bo kuè ce láè mmir mbenduè buu anaè aè ñger Yú' Rara.	Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, that you may abound in hope, in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Bto' ce mdip mi sïìr a kaari a tarte ker ba mtuèu a m káèáñger, a bú.	Every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.
Ñwáè ce e ka' kani máè ker kani wa blaèa foñ, ñgaèñ túr yuu ce yi be sa' ye. Wa blaèa a yuu ce vi be sa' ñwáè anaè aè noèñ elúèsimbuèu.	He who rejects me, and doesn't receive my sayings, has one who judges him. The word that I spoke, the same will judge him in the last day.
A m geèe ye búè, e ba aèmboè ncoèo wa'a, ce e m ce duèñshi ená e yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' li rbyemïì, ka' a m be gee ye búè aè nfeè' anaè ka' wa'a. Yi ka' ba aè njáâá wa'a, Abraèham aè ba seè'ni taèr beèe wááwá ce a byemi, Nyúè aè ce yá woweèe aè beâe byáánïì, ka' woweèe a geèe búè ka' wa'a.	He received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the faith which he had while he was in uncircumcision, that he might be the father of all those who believe, though they might be in uncircumcision, that righteousness might also be accounted to them.
E lo embo a du aè njïìsaèp ka', a gwe kúkúèp, a loo neè Nyúè ená yi ka' ba aètáèr e gee tá nfeè' ñgá' ce e ce vúè naè caa embe yeâ tuè.	He went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass away from him.
Nárïì aè ba muu Málákïì, Málákïì aè ba muu Adïì, Adïì aè ba muu Kosaèm, Kosaèm aè ba muu ÁÈlimadaèm, ÁÈlimadaèm aè ba muu ÁÊr,	the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmodam, the son of Er,
Baná Jisoès a tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce e ghááte neè seèe. E ghááte njobeè' e yu ñwáâ nrara a ce kwaè'shi káè a ce geèe faèa ka', a ba yi jáá efa beèe ce a ke geèe buu bbebep, Nyúè aè naa ye mbekïì.	For such a high priest was fitting for us: holy, guiltless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the heavens;
Yuu ce ñwáè e ke ye, a yuu yi ke geèe ñwáè e bep aè bsii Nyúè ka'. Yuu ce yi ke geèe ñwáè e ba jaèpri e ke ba yuu ce yi ke fúú ekuè cuâu ñwáè.”	"That which enters into the mouth doesn't defile the man; but that which proceeds out of the mouth, this defiles the man."""
Ndoèo aè co' seèe wááwá njobeè' seèe aè láè mncir wááwá ka'. Jisos Kraâis aè tee seèe efa ndoèo ca. E m loèr yiseèe dïì', a kwe mbe ce, a lo a ba ñwáè ndoèo aè bsii Nyúè. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce a ka' káti mbe ce baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè ndoèo aè bsii Nyúè.”	"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us. For it is written, ""Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree,"""
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni ce weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu aèbee na, baná weèe borni ñgeâe bebep. Fa ba ñwáè rshentee káè ñwáè ncápntee ka'. Fa kwaè'shi bebep aèmboè ñwáè moè' ka'. Fa ba ñwáè mnsa'ni ka'. Fa maè'shi tá blaâa bbebep vi fúú eku wáâ cuèu ka'.	but now you also put them all away: anger, wrath, malice, slander, and shameful speaking out of your mouth.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ba riñ yuu ce Nyúè e ke fa neè beèe, ker riñ njáèá ñwáè ce e ce loo mdip ese wáè tá e bo no, aè ba loo ba wáè ená e fa wáè mdip ce mi ke mïì ka', tá e fa wáè mdip anaè.”	"Jesus answered her, ""If you knew the gift of God, and who it is who says to you, 'Give me a drink,' you would have asked him, and he would have given you living water."""
Rcaè'nïì ca aè sañ máâ Pol neè ya bo.	This greeting is by me, Paul, with my own hand.
A m duè neè Jisoès njeptii ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba bleebeèe, ker ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a vú aèbee.	They led Jesus away to the high priest. All the chief priests, the elders, and the scribes came together with him.
Woweèe a laa yuu ka'. Jisoès aè koo ñwáè anaè a gee e ke'seè, a laa neè ye ená e duê.	But they were silent. He took him, and healed him, and let him go.
E kùʼsi nàʼ anà gòr.	He has fattened the cow so much.
Yuʼshi yuu ce yòo taa ce làa.	Listen to what your father is saying.
Fa sár mnsár blúr ka'. Fa caèasi nfeè' aè rbeè' braèraè beèe ce a m kweñger ka', fa ba ñwáè mlap ka', fa ce sár mnsár aèmboè mncir ce Nyúè aè m fa neè Musïìs naè ka'. Njáèá buu ca yu buu bcicïì, sá' aè ba njo ka'.	but shun foolish questionings, genealogies, strife, and disputes about the law; for they are unprofitable and vain.
Weèr aè m naèti a jár seê, a vú a yá weèe a fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis neè weèe. AÈmboè wee yu mbeèp mo' efa ler rfaè' na, weèr aè ka' ce naèa tu neè weèe baná weèr ce naèa tu a caa embe dïì' ce weèr aè ba naèa ka'. Weèr aè m ka' tá baè faè' fa weâe mú ka', weèr aè m ba naèa tu caèa embo.	For we don't stretch ourselves too much, as though we didn't reach to you. For we came even as far as to you with the Good News of Christ,
Ca yi m geèe beèe a byá' ñgaâa byañ foñ a vú aègho a lá mbe bkuu ba mbe mwaèa aèwaâa nduunjïì ená Pitaè ka' ce caèa tá li rleèñshi li bo caèa mbenduè beèe mo' efa waâp mú.	They even carried out the sick into the streets, and laid them on cots and mattresses, so that as Peter came by, at the least his shadow might overshadow some of them.
A m loèr ma nyaèa anaè a ma' njep ñgoèñ na. Ma nyaèa anaè foñ yu nyo eluâuñgoèñ ce a too li rlii ená ñwáè mnaèñ, too rmo' ená Sataèn. E yu ñwáè ce e ke bo' beèe enjep ñgoèñ na. A m maè' ye a vi bcïìndap weèe njep ñgoèñ na.	The great dragon was thrown down, the old serpent, he who is called the devil and Satan, the deceiver of the whole world. He was thrown down to the earth, and his angels were thrown down with him.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè seèe ce seèe ce cu seèe Tata Jisos Kraâis weèe, njeñwáè yu neè yi tu ka', mbañruèñwáè aè ba neè yi tu ka'.	Nevertheless, neither is the woman independent of the man, nor the man independent of the woman, in the Lord.
E niñ mbe ndaèp, a laa neè beèe anaè enáê, “Weèe ce warse ba ká, a ce koosimnse? Muu ca aè kwe kwe ka'. E ce buumi buumi.”	"When he had entered in, he said to them, ""Why do you make an uproar and weep? The child is not dead, but is asleep."""
Jisos Kraâis yu yi ba muu ce e túr ñger mbenduè beèe Nyúè aèmboè muu ñwáè ndap e ke túr ñger mbenduè buu yïì ta naè. E ce geèe rfaè' anaè neè mini-ñwáè. See seèe yu beèe Nyúè, ce seèe aè ka' ku táá tatap, lá mmir mbenduè buu ce Nyúè a kaè' neè seèe, ce yu' rboèñ aè rsuñ beèe buu anaè.	but Christ is faithful as a Son over his house; whose house we are, if we hold fast our confidence and the glorying of our hope firm to the end.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a laa neè ñwáè ce li rkoo li m kwe naè enáê, “Maè' lo rkoo kuèyáá.” E ma', li kútïì rboèñboñ, a ba aèmboè lïì ce li m kwe yi ka' naè.	"Then he told the man, ""Stretch out your hand."" He stretched it out; and it was restored whole, just like the other."
Bár yïì beèe ce rúú a ka' yu' yuu ce Jáms ba Joân a m laèa na, nyor aè bep woweèe seê.	When the ten heard it, they began to be indignant towards James and John.
“Weèe aè yu' ená a m laèa enáê, ‘Koèñ nfúroè, baa ñwáè ce e baèa wáè’.	"You have heard that it was said, 'You shall love your neighbor, and hate your enemy.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	44	M ce laèa ya neè weèe ená, koèñ neè beèe ce a baèa weèe, loo neè neè beèe ce a ce fa weèe ñgá',	But I tell you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	45	tá weèe bo ba boo yeè Ta ce e cu mbe buèu. E ke geèe nyúè sañ mbenduè beâe bbebep ba beâe bboèñboñ, gee mbeèñ gwe aè mnsuu beèe ce a cu rcu yáánïì ba beèe ce a cu rcu yáánïì ka'.	that you may be children of your Father who is in heaven. For he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and the unjust.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	46	Weèe aè ka' ku koñ ba beèe ce a koèñ weèe, aède' weèe koo ba njáèá blaè' ká? Mboè ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' a ke geèe wa' foñ a?	For if you love those who love you, what reward do you have? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	47	Weèe aè ka' ku ce caè'ni ba bfúr wee, baná yuu ce weèe aè geèe a caa beèe mo' yu ba ká? Mboè beèe enje jáá a ke geèe wa' foñ a?	If you only greet your friends, what more do you do than others? Don't even the tax collectors do the same?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	48	Baná weèe ba yáánïì seê, aèmboè yeè Ta embe buèu yu yáánïì foñ naè.	Therefore you shall be perfect, just as your Father in heaven is perfect.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	1	“Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' weèe gee ñgeâe yáánïì aè bsii beèe tá a bo yá yuu ce weèe aè geèe ka'. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, baná aède' yeè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu la' weèe ka'.	Be careful that you don't do your charitable giving before men, to be seen by them, or else you have no reward from your Father who is in heaven."
Yi ke ba ená a lá mruâ' mfi ba njep mñguèp mruè' vïû bfi tá mi bo kúète ka', tá mñguèp mruè' vi to'ñger ka'.	But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.
Njeèndoñ ce máè m yu' e ce suèu embe buèu naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Duè koo ñwaè' ce a búèr yi ba mbaè bo ncïìndap Nyúè ce e tár kuèu mbenduè rdip rgoèr, a tár mo' mbenduè nshe naè.”	"The voice which I heard from heaven, again speaking with me, said, ""Go, take the book which is open in the hand of the angel who stands on the sea and on the land."""
a laa enáê, “Byá ca aè m laèa ená aède' e ku sa'sïì Ndap Nyúè ca, ker ba'ri aè mnoâñ btaar.”	"and said, ""This man said, 'I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it in three days.'"""
Weèr aè m ce keè' yer ená a ye ñwáè ce e be tee beèe Isráèl efa ñgá'. Ku ba ca caè'caè' ka', mnoèñ vi yu seè'ni vi btaar káâ' nyúè ce buu ca aè m koni.	But we were hoping that it was he who would redeem Israel. Yes, and besides all this, it is now the third day since these things happened.
Ŋwɛ̀ ŋkʉ̀ʉ ka tɛ cop kwaa kaʼ, ŋwɛ̀ kep ye, banɛ ŋwɛ̀ anà be làʼ bcop kwâa.	If the landlord has not tasted the corn and someone harvest and eat, therefore that person will pay for unlawfully tasting the corn.
M ce suñ weèe máná yuu mo' ce yi caèa Nyúè yi yu mbena.	But I tell you that one greater than the temple is here.
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèe, beèe a taè' yúshi weèr aè mnoèñ wááwá, a ce loèr weèr aèmboè njeèe ce a ce duè aègho aè rsáá wa'a.”	"Even as it is written, ""For your sake we are killed all day long. We were accounted as sheep for the slaughter."""
Woweèe a ka' kúti, yá beèe caè, ñwáè moè' a vúê, a gú'shi njeptii Jisoès,	When they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling down to him, saying,
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Yaè ndap be ba ndap rloo. Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè gee yaè ndap aè kútïì ba mbúè' byáèá.” ’	"saying to them, ""It is written, 'My house is a house of prayer,' but you have made it a 'den of robbers'!"""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená masaè anaè be fa yïì buu wááwá mbe yeâ mmboè.	Truly I tell you, that he will set him over all that he has.
Beèe magoèr a ká' a ce laèa enáê, “Yú' nyúèrkaè' yi karsi ye tu, e ká' a ce baa. Seèe ce yu' yuu ce e ce laèa njoká seê?”	"Many of them said, ""He has a demon, and is insane! Why do you listen to him?"""
E m laèa ená yi boèñ ená a beèe Nyúè weèe a yá ñgá' aèbee caa ce ená e gee buu bbebep ce yu' rboèñ aègho aè mú nfeè' múcaèr.	choosing rather to share ill treatment with God's people, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a time;
Agripaè aè laa neè Fástoès enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè ka' tá baè laèa ená ñkwe Rum a ñwáè ce e be sa' vi mnsa' ka', seèe aè ba maè'shi ye tá e duê.”	"Agrippa said to Festus, ""This man might have been set free if he had not appealed to Caesar."""
Ká' ese aè nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè ká' a ce raasi neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená e be kuè duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, yá ñgá' mbaè mmbo bleebeèe ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir goèr seê, tá a yú ye, mnoèñ vi ba btaar e fúú efa rkwe.	From that time, Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer many things from the elders, chief priests, and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.
Weèr woweèe aè ka' vúè aèfa, máè caasïì nfeè' ka'. Túè' aè ka' raa, máè niñ mbe kor aè rsa' mnsa', a laa máná a vú neè ñwáè anaè.	When therefore they had come together here, I didn't delay, but on the next day sat on the judgment seat, and commanded the man to be brought.
Awá Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Wáè yá ku' mndap bgoèrgoèr ca a? Luèr moè' be cu nje ndap ka'. A be káèáshi vi wááwá.”	"Jesus said to him, ""Do you see these great buildings? There will not be left here one stone on another, which will not be thrown down."""
E ka' ce yá ku' beèe, nse yi koo ye neè woweèe, njobeè' woweèe a m jep, a riñ yuu ce a ce geèe ka', aèmboè njeèe ce yi buu ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe wa'a.	But when he saw the multitudes, he was moved with compassion for them, because they were harassed and scattered, like sheep without a shepherd.
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Jus ce a m byemi ka', a m barsi beèe enje jáá, a karsi wap btu, a gee woweèe a baa bfúr.	But the disbelieving Jews stirred up and embittered the souls of the Gentiles against the brothers.
Yi yu ená nsuñ kuu rkwe Jisos Kraâis embe kïìntaa yu blúr neè beèe ce a ce bú njep múè buu bbebep. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè seèe ce seèe ce luèñ, nsuñ ca yu ñger Nyúè.	For the word of the cross is foolishness to those who are dying, but to us who are saved it is the power of God.
Muu wàp à kwe.	Their child is dead.
Ñwáâ mboèñmboñ e ke fúr buu bboèñboñ efa buu bboèñboñ ce vi yu njep yeâ ntee, ñwáâ mbembep fúr buu bbebep efa buu bbebep ce vi yu njep yeâ ntee. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' ñwáè e ke laèa ba efa ku' buu ce vi ruu njep yeâ ntee.	The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings out that which is good, and the evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings out that which is evil, for out of the abundance of the heart, his mouth speaks.
Ñwáè embenjïì ñwáè embe yeâ njïì aè ker laasi ye, a kwe. Yi m ku koni neè woweèe wááwá wa'a, moè' efa woweèe aè bi boo a njeñwáè anaè ka'.	The third took her, and likewise the seven all left no children, and died.
M ce yá ñgá' njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca, a ka' ce yá wa'a, a ce koosi rïìtu ka' njobeè' m rïìñ ñwáè ce máè byemi neè ye, a riñ máná e be kupshi mfaè' ce e fa mba máâ mmboè naè láè duè baè' noèñ ce Jisoès be vúè.	For this cause I also suffer these things. Yet I am not ashamed, for I know him whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to guard that which I have committed to him against that day.
Jisoès aè ká'shïì woweèe aèbee, a laa neè woweèe wááwá enáê, “Weèe yi weená ñgaâa rsa' beèe enje jáá a ke sa' yap beèe neè ñger-ñwáè seê. Beâe bgoèrgoèr mo' a loèr yap ñger nyú' beèe agho foñ.	"Jesus summoned them, and said to them, ""You know that they who are recognized as rulers over the nations lord it over them, and their great ones exercise authority over them."
Ŋgǎa ntaa a daʼse e.	The business people have all gone away.
AÈmboè seèe rïìñ buu ca wa'a, baná seèe aè ba loèr blaèa ce seèe aè yu' aèmboè ye na tatap seê, faè dïì' seèe lo fúú enjo ka'.	Therefore we ought to pay greater attention to the things that were heard, lest perhaps we drift away.
Li rlòo li tap sê.	His/Her prayer is very strong.
Yuu ce e laèa na yi ghááte aè yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê,	This agrees with the words of the prophets. As it is written,
A ka' koo Jisoès ce duè aègho, muu nsuènsuè moè' ce e m ku wap ba cáè' aè nyoèr aè ce duè a yeâ mbuèu. Beèe ca a koo ye aè cáè',	A certain young man followed him, having a linen cloth thrown around himself, over his naked body. The young men grabbed him,
A mbuèu ce a ce too ñkúè anaè ená ñkúè bláá, caar ba' ntïìni na.	"Therefore that field was called ""The Field of Blood"" to this day."
Ku' buu ce rla' ca li m túr wááwá vi ku mi ba njaè' moè'sir.” Beèe ce a yu btu mfaè' neè beèe ce a ke faè' mbe bkeñ bgoèrgoèr, ba beèe wááwá ce a ke yeñger ba enjep roè, a m táá foñ aènjïìsaèp,	For in an hour such great riches are made desolate.' Every shipmaster, and everyone who sails anywhere, and mariners, and as many as gain their living by sea, stood far away,
E ka' laèa wa' mïìsi, a woweèe a gú'shïì neè mñkúúshi, e gee rloo.	When he had spoken these things, he knelt down and prayed with them all.
Ñwáè ntoèo nlaèa moè' aè m ba a ce too ye ená Dáèmitroès. E m ce geèe mú mndap nyúâ bká'ká' neè njáèá bco' mo' ce a m ce too ená Silvaè, vi feeseè ndap nyúè AÈtámïìs. Beèe ce a m ce faè' neè ye a m ce ye sá' enjep rfaè' anaè seê.	For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, who made silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little business to the craftsmen,
Beèe ce a byemi a be geèe buu ghagha' ca. Woweèe a be fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe fa máâ rlii, laèa bli bfi,	These signs will accompany those who believe: in my name they will cast out demons; they will speak with new languages;
Ka' beèe ce a ce fa weèe ncep aè rcu aèmboè beèe Jisos Kraâis a yu goèr wa'a, yeè ta ku ba moè'sir. Yu ba máè ce máè m ba aèmboè taèr neè weèe njobeè' máè m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè weèe tá weèe ka' keè ba beèe Jisoès Kraêis.	For though you have ten thousand tutors in Christ, yet not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus, I became your father through the Good News.
Ñwáè ce e ka' naa yïì nyor mbekïì baná a be suèusi ñgaèñ njep nsheè. Ñwáè ce e ka' suusi yïì nyor njep nsheè baná a be naèa ye mbekïì.	Whoever exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted.
E m ker laa neè máè enáê, “La rfaè' li mïì. M yu Alfaè, a ba OÈmágaè. A máè ñwáè ce e m káè' buu wááwá, a ba ñwáè ce e be mïìsi buu anaè. Ñ wáè ce ntee mdip yi ka' ce luèu ye, baná m be sáp mdip enjep rdip ryoèñ fa ye tá e no aè cicïì.	"He said to me, ""It is done! I am the Alpha and the Omega, the Beginning and the End. I will give freely to him who is thirsty from the spring of the water of life."
Yuu ce weèe aè ba geèe yi yu ená weèe aè ba cep wee btu faè dïì' ntee bebep anaè yi bo' ñwáè moè' tá e tee tu neè Nyúè ka'. Kuè ce gee neè wa'a aè mnoèñ wááwá aèmboè nfeè' ku bii aègho ntïìni na.	"but exhort one another day by day, so long as it is called ""today;"" lest any one of you be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin."
E m laèa ená a baptir woweèe aè rlii Jisos Kraêis. A ka' baèptir woweèe, woweèe a laa neè ye ená e cu a woweèe aè mú mnoâñ mo'.	He commanded them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. Then they asked him to stay some days.
Baná weèe ku táá tatap weèe Tata weèe, bfúr waê. M koèñ weèe magoèr seê, bkar waê. Ya ntee yi ce luèu máè aè ryá weèe. Yu weèe ce weèe ce geèe m ce lu'shi, a ce naèa tu neè weèe.	Therefore, my brothers, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord, my beloved.
Weèr aè ka' baè' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, bfúr ce a m ba aèfo a konïì weèr boèñboñ seê.	When we had come to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “AÈsayaè ce ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa yuu mini kuu weèe ce ñgaâa mbo'ni aèmboè a m sañ enáê, ‘Beèe ca a ku ce yu'ni neè máè ba neè cuèu. Yap mntee yi yu aènjïìsaèp ese máè.	"He answered them, ""Well did Isaiah prophesy of you hypocrites, as it is written, 'This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me."
Saimún Pitaè aè ka' yá yuu ce yi m ba na, a gwe njeptii Jisoès, a laa enáê, “Tataê, naèti efa máâ geñ. M yu ñwáâ ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, ""Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, Lord."""
baná e m geèe wa'a tá e bo duèñshi rboèñ efa yi foèo neè beèe ce e m ce koosimnse neè woweèe, aè ba beèe ce e m kupshi tá woweèe a bo koni foèo anaè naè.	and that he might make known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy, which he prepared beforehand for glory,
Beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a be yá dïì' ce a ce duè, njo' rraa anaè. Bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na a be loèr bkuè' ce a túr wááwá duè aègho aè rla' anaè.	The nations will walk in its light. The kings of the earth bring the glory and honor of the nations into it.
Vʉ̀ yɛ mɛ̀ tɛ sò bo dù.	Come and see me so that we will go.
E yu ñwáè ce e ke faè' mbe dïû' rara ce yi yu mbe dïì' ce a ke loo neè Nyúè. Dïû' rara ca aè m geèe ñwáè ka', aè m geèe ba Nyúè. Yu dïì' rloo ce yi yu yáánïì.	a servant of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, not man.
E ke làa buu à mŋgàa.	She/He speaks in parables.
A be káè' embe nfeè' ce a m yú Ábáèl duè ba' mbe nfeè' ce a m yú Saèkaèriyaè mbetar dïû' ntoèo rfa ba dïû' rara. ÁÈno, m ce suñ weèe máná ñgúè beâe seè'ni a be laèa yuu kuu buu ca.	from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary.' Yes, I tell you, it will be required of this generation.
E bàrshi kwâa a fa mɛ̀.	He has shelled part of corn from its cob and has given me.
Weèe fa leèse efa rkoni bkeèe ce a vúè aè rcaè'ni weèe ka', keè' neè woweèe boèñboñ. Beèe mo' a m koni bkeèe a ke' aè woweèe boèñboñ seê, a ke' riñ ená bkeèe anaè aè m ba bcïìndap Nyúè ka'.	Don't forget to show hospitality to strangers, for in doing so, some have entertained angels without knowing it.
Jisoès aè m ku riñ ená ñger mo' yi fúú ye enje nyoèr, a karsi nyor a laa enáê, “AÈ joèo nda wa bcáè'?”	"Immediately Jesus, perceiving in himself that the power had gone out from him, turned around in the crowd, and asked, ""Who touched my clothes?"""
Beèe ca a ce laèa wa'a, a ce geèe aèmboè a máñni ená aè m ba eluâuñgoèñ Nyúè aè laa ená rbuu li ba, tá ñgoèñ yi ba, buu ca aè ku ba ghup ka' wa'a. E m gaèpse nshe a mdip, a gee nshe neè mdip.	For this they willfully forget, that there were heavens from of old, and an earth formed out of water and amid water, by the word of God;
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená Abraèham aè m túr boo mmbañruè a baa. E m bi moè' a ñkwaèa, a bi moè' a njeñwáè ce e m ba ñkwaèa ka'.	For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one by the handmaid, and one by the free woman.
Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi yuu ce e laèa, baná ñgaèñ ce duèñshi ená yuu Nyúè aè laèa yi yu mini.	He who has received his witness has set his seal to this, that God is true.
E fa woowèe ntaŋ mbòŋmboŋ.	She has given them a good suggestion.
Njeè ku bii yañ weèr vú ba' seè'ni na, ntee-mdip yi ku bii luèu weèr, weèr aè ce yar ba bkaèkaâ cáè'. E ba aè nfeè' moè', a lip weèr. Weèr túr rla' ka'.	Even to this present hour we hunger, thirst, are naked, are beaten, and have no certain dwelling place.
Woweèe a m laèa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, weèr rïìñ werná aè ce laèa, ker ce yá'ni ba yuu ce yi yu yáánïì. Weèr rïìñ werná wáâ ke loèr ñwáè moè' jáá ka', a ce yá'ni beèe mnduunjïì Nyúè neè mini-ñwáè.	"They asked him, ""Teacher, we know that you say and teach what is right, and aren't partial to anyone, but truly teach the way of God."
A mbuèu ce m ce gúè'shi njeptii Taèr	For this cause, I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
E ka' lá'si vúê, e fa yá weèe aè mmirloè ka'.	lest coming suddenly he might find you sleeping.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès e Jáèrusaláèm a ka' yu' ená beâe aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè a yu' blaâa Nyúè a byemi, a tuu Pitaè ba Joân ená a du yá woweèe.	Now when the apostles who were at Jerusalem heard that Samaria had received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,
M ka' gee nyor bep weèe, ñwáè ce aède' e ka' gee nyor boñ máè ba nda, caa efa weèe ce máè geèe nyor aè bep weèe naè?	For if I make you sorry, then who will make me glad but he who is made sorry by me?
Yá neè mbúâ ñwaè' goèrgoèr ce m ce sañ neè ya bo na.	See with what large letters I write to you with my own hand.
Weèe fa ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Weèe fa no bláá ka'. Weèe fa ye mnyaèa ce a toosi mndoñ efa gho vi kweñgeèr ka', ker borni bsaèkïì. Weèe aè ka' borni buu ca, baná weèe aè geèe boèñboñ. Seèe aè bár.”	"that you abstain from things sacrificed to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from sexual immorality, from which if you keep yourselves, it will be well with you. Farewell."""
E m yá ñgá' mbe mmbo ñgaâa mcáèp magoèr, a too mbaa seê, a ke' ke'se ka'. Yañ yi ku ce duè ba kuèntombïì.	and had suffered many things by many physicians, and had spent all that she had, and was no better, but rather grew worse,
Lo rlii a nda?	What is your name?
Beèe a lïìp weèr, a fa weèr aè shañ. E ba aè nfeè' moè' beèe a gañ weèr. E ba aè nfeè' moè' weèr fa' jorni, e ba aè nfeè' moè' weèr túr nfeè' aè rbuumïì ka', e ba aè nfeè' moè' weèr túr yuu ye ka'.	in beatings, in imprisonments, in riots, in labors, in watchings, in fastings;
Sèe be cuute àbee sèesi rfǎʼ a àyàŋsè.	We will meet and discuss about tomorrowʼs work together.
Jisoès aè ka' loè embo ce duè, mmbañruè mo' beèe a mbaa ce a m ba mnfeèp, a natïì, a du a yeâ mbuèu a ce waa enáê, “Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè weèr.”	"As Jesus passed by from there, two blind men followed him, calling out and saying, ""Have mercy on us, son of David!"""
E m vúè njïì embe njïì Jisoès, a joo cuâu cáè' ese ye, a ku ke'se mbe dïì'.	came behind him, and touched the fringe of his cloak, and immediately the flow of her blood stopped.
Jáms ba Joân ce boo Sábáèdi a vú a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, weèr ce koèñ werná aè gee yuu mo' neè weèr.”	"James and John, the sons of Zebedee, came near to him, saying, ""Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we will ask."""
Ñwáè ce e ce loèr ená noâñ mo' yi yu jáá ce geèe wa'a tá e bo yu'ni neè Tataê. Ñwáè ce e ce ye buu wááwá, ce geèe wa'a njobeè' e ce koèñ aè ryu'ni neè Tata foñ. E ce yoèñshi Nyúè aè byee anaè. Ñwáè ce e kani efa rye njáèá byee mo', ce geèe wa'a njobeè' e ce koèñ aè ryu'ni neè Tata foñ. Ye ye ce yoèñshi Nyúè.	He who observes the day, observes it to the Lord; and he who does not observe the day, to the Lord he does not observe it. He who eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks. He who doesn't eat, to the Lord he doesn't eat, and gives God thanks.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Poêl, ce m yu mbe shañ aètu Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ yi weèr Timotïì ce e yu nfúr yïìseèe. Weèr ce sañ neè wáè ce Fïìlemúèn ce weèr koèñ seê, seèe aè ce faè' aè yuu mo'sir, ba beèe Nyúè wááwá ce a ke tarshi mbe wáâ ndaèp.	Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy our brother, to Philemon, our beloved fellow worker,
M ce loo máná Tata Nyúè geèe tá Tata Jisos Kraâis koosimnse neè ye aè noèñ ce e ka' vúê. Wáè rïìñ ená e m jaè' máè aè to' Áfásoès aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá.	(the Lord grant to him to find the Lord's mercy in that day); and in how many things he served at Ephesus, you know very well.
A ka' ye yu', Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Baashi neè bbábá' bráâd ce vi báti naè aèbee faè dïì' vi bú aè cicïì ka'.”	"When they were filled, he said to his disciples, ""Gather up the broken pieces which are left over, that nothing be lost."""
Baná seèe fa koosi bsáè, borni efa rgeèe yuu boèñboñ ka', njobeè' seèe ka' tá borni ka', nfeè' ka' gháá, seèe ye sá' efa liseèe rfaè' anaè.	Let us not be weary in doing good, for we will reap in due season, if we don't give up.
Buu wááwá ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' mncir ba mbe mñwaè' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, vi táá ba mbenduè mncir bbaa ca.”	"The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments."""
Weèe aè ka' byemi wa'a, a ba rduèñshïì neè ñgaâa rbyemïì ce aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ba aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè.	so that you became an example to all who believe in Macedonia and in Achaia.
Yá neè ená buu ce weèe aè m yá'ni efa rkáè' vi cu njep weâe mntee. Buu ce weèe aè m yá'ni na vi ka' cu njep weâe mntee baná weèe be ba aèbee weèe muu ba Taèr.	Therefore, as for you, let that remain in you which you heard from the beginning. If that which you heard from the beginning remains in you, you also will remain in the Son, and in the Father.
Wáè ce aè ce naèa nyor ená aè riñ mncir Nyúè seê, waè' wáâ ke geèe beèe a ce laèa bebep aèmboè Nyúè njobeè' aè ce bú' mncir anaè a?	You who glory in the law, through your disobedience of the law do you dishonor God?
E m tuu bsoogáè mbe shañ, woweèe a du a tee tu ese Joân,	and he sent and beheaded John in the prison.
Weèe aè ka' ce so'niñgoèñ, baná weèe ce geèe ba yuu bebep, weèe aè bú' ncir Nyúè.	But if you show partiality, you commit sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
Yi ka' ba yáánïì ená má máè duê, weèr woweèe du bsïìp.	If it is appropriate for me to go also, they will go with me.
Waè' beèe ce aède' a fa', tar buu enjep mmboè ka' ce yeñger, ku ba weèr Baènabaès a?	Or have only Barnabas and I no right to not work?
Muu ca ce kwe mbɛp.	This child is suffering from cold.
E koni rfàʼ.	He has got a job.
Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “Mboè ñwáè ca a Jisoès muu Josáèf a? To seèe rïìñ yïì ta ba yïì maê. E ka' ce laèa enáê, ‘Máè suèu embe buèu’ njoká?”	"They said, ""Isn't this Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? How then does he say, 'I have come down out of heaven?'"""
Ñwáè ce e yu weèr ye ku ba Luêk. Loèr Mak tá weèe ye vú tá e bo jaè' máè aè rfaè' ce m ce geèe.	Only Luke is with me. Take Mark, and bring him with you, for he is useful to me for service.
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Tata Jisoès aè ku ba weèr ye a fa máè ñger, tá m bo feè'shi buu Nyúè wááwá neè beèe enje jáá tá woweèe a yu'. Nyúè aè m fúr máè ekuè cuèu búrúè'.	But the Lord stood by me, and strengthened me, that through me the message might be fully proclaimed, and that all the Gentiles might hear; and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion.
Sèe à bɛr i.	See you again (goodbye).
Ŋkaa à caŋ a niŋ mbe bʉʼ.	The monkey has ran into the isolated portion of grass.
“Máè m jáèr fa weâe mú a ce feè'shi aèmboè kúú Nyúè. M rïìñ seè'ni na máná aède' moè' efa weèe ker yá máè ka'.	"Now, behold, I know that you all, among whom I went about preaching the Kingdom of God, will see my face no more.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	26	M ce laèa ntïìni na neè weèe máná ñwáè moè' efa weèe ka' bú, aède' a taa máè ka',	Therefore I testify to you this day that I am clean from the blood of all men,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	27	njobeè' máè m buu efa rsuñ weèe buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè koèñ ená vi ba ka'.	for I didn't shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of God.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	28	Keè'ni neè wee btu ker ke'ni njeèe ce Yú' Rara yi fa mba weâe mmboè. Fyá' neè aè cor Nyúè ce e m yuu neè bláá muu yïì.	Take heed, therefore, to yourselves, and to all the flock, in which the Holy Spirit has made you overseers, to shepherd the assembly of the Lord and God which he purchased with his own blood.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	29	Máè rïìñ máná m be duè wáá tá bkuura vi ñaa bcuèu niñ a weâe mú, fa ñgá' neè beèe Nyúè wááwá.	For I know that after my departure, vicious wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	30	Beèe mo' efa weâe mú seeseê, a be toosi blaèa mini tá a bo súèñ beèe moè' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès duè aègho aè mbeèp yaèp.	Men will arise from among your own selves, speaking perverse things, to draw away the disciples after them.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	31	Baná weèe lor nfeè', ker kuushi foñ ená máè m cep weèe neè mñgoommir- ñwáè, neètú' ker ba neèmootïì, aè bfeâ' btaar.”	Therefore watch, remembering that for a period of three years I didn't cease to admonish everyone night and day with tears.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	32	“Káâ' seè'ni na, máè láè weèe mbe mmbo Nyúè, a ker ma'shi weèe neè yi nlaèa aèmboè yi ntee boèñboñ. AÈde' nlaèa anaè yi gee weèe ce ba yáánïì, koni bti' weèe beèe wááwá ce Nyúè aè geèe a ba brara.	Now, brothers, I entrust you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you the inheritance among all those who are sanctified.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	33	Máè m gani mbaâa ñwáè moè' káè bcáâ' ñwáè moè' ka'.	I coveted no one's silver, or gold, or clothing.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	34	Wee weèe foñ rïìñ ená máè m faè' neè ma mmbo, a ja' ya tu, a ker ja' beèe ce weèr woweèe aè m ce faè'.	You yourselves know that these hands served my necessities, and those who were with me.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	20	35	Buu wááwá ce máè m geèe vi m ba aè rduèñshi weèe ená seèe fa' aè njáâá wa'a tá seèe bo ce jaè' beèe ce a buu ñger. Seâe geèe wa'a ce kuushi blaèa ce Tata Jisoès aè laèa.” E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ce fa fa, yu ñwáè mboâñtu caa ñwáè ce e ce koo yi koo.”	In all things I gave you an example, that so laboring you ought to help the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, 'It is more blessed to give than to receive.'"
E ka' fúú, Jisoès aè laa enáê, “A kuè'si Muu Ñwáè seè'ni. A ku'si Nyúè njïì enjep ye.	"When he had gone out, Jesus said, ""Now the Son of Man has been glorified, and God has been glorified in him."
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ca a cepshïì beèe ená a laa tá Pailáèt fúr ba Baèrabaès fa neè woweèe.	But the chief priests stirred up the multitude, that he should release Barabbas to them instead.
ená buu wááwá ba beèe wááwá ce a yu mbe buèu, a ker ba mbe tunshe, ker ba beèe ce a yu mbaè yir a yu' rlii Jisoès bo gú'shi,	that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of those in heaven, those on earth, and those under the earth,
“Yi ku ba foñ ená aède' ñwáè niñ mbe ndaèp ñwáè ñger, kwá' yïì buu du aègho ka', ce yi ka' tá ba ená e kur ñwáè ñger anaè ka'. E ka' kur ye wáá, e ka' kwá' buu embe yeâ ndaèp.	But no one can enter into the house of the strong man to plunder, unless he first binds the strong man; and then he will plunder his house.
E tàŋte à ntaaŋguu.	She stumbled over a stick.
Weèe ce gee tá woweèe a yu' nsuñ ce e yu aèmboè ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Weèe gee wa'a tá m bo koni yuu ce m naatu aègho, aè noèñ ce Kraâis aè vúè, faè dïì' yi bo keè ba ená máè m yú nyor aè cicïì ka'.	holding up the word of life; that I may have something to boast in the day of Christ, that I didn't run in vain nor labor in vain.
Má máè ce gheèter aè rgeèe tá nyor boñ ñwáè wááwá aè buu wááwá ce m ce geèe. Má ke kwaè'shi ba aè yuu ce aètaè yi ja' ba máè caè'caè' ka'. Má ke kwaè'shi ba aèmboè yuu ce aètaè yi ja' beèe wááwá, tá woweèe a bo luèñ efa buu bbebep.	even as I also please all men in all things, not seeking my own profit, but the profit of the many, that they may be saved.
Woweèe a yop yáá fi enáê, “Wáè ghááte aè rloèr fuè ñwaè', naèa nlaèadoñ ce a sïìñ bcuèu efa gho aègho naè, njobeè' a m sáá wáè, wáè lor wo bláá a yuu beèe aègho neè Nyúè. Wáè yuu woweèe aè mntáè' wááwá, ce vi yu aè bto' wááwá a ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá.	"They sang a new song, saying, ""You are worthy to take the book, and to open its seals: for you were killed, and bought us for God with your blood, out of every tribe, language, people, and nation,"
Geewa'a ñwáè aè ka' ce jáèr neètú' baná ñgaèñ be kote njobeè' rraa li yu njep ye ka'.”	"But if a man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light isn't in him."""
Baná weèe suusi yeè nyor njeptii Nyúè ce e túr ñger, nfeè' aè ka' gháá, tá e bo naèa weèe mbekïì.	Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time;
Weèr a yu' aèmboè e ce laèa ená Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt be saè'si dïì' ca keèr kupse ndeèe to' ce Musïìs aè m fa neè seèe.”	"For we have heard him say that this Jesus of Nazareth will destroy this place, and will change the customs which Moses delivered to us."""
Máè gheèter a cañ mcañnïì ce mmboèñmboñ a misïî, a táá ba njep mini a ba' aèlúèsimbuèu.	I have fought the good fight. I have finished the course. I have kept the faith.
Beèe moè' ce beèe Farïìsi a m tuu	The ones who had been sent were from the Pharisees.
Njeñwáè ka' fúú bguèu, e fa keèr yá nduu moè' ka'. Ka' ba ená e yá nduu moè', e kútïì ba a nduu yïì caè. Yi yu foñ ená mbañruèñwáè fa juèu ñgwa yïì ka'.	(but if she departs, let her remain unmarried, or else be reconciled to her husband), and that the husband not leave his wife.
Bkar waê, weèe fa byemi byú' bsïìp ka'. Weèe taase byú' aè ryá ená vi loè ese Nyúè lá, njobeè' beèe magoèr ce a bo'shi ená a yu ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, a yu aè ñgoèñ.	Beloved, don't believe every spirit, but test the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
E ka' kuè bii ce laèa, kúr beèe a vúê. Ñwáè ce a m ce too ená Judaès, ce e m ba moè' efa beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú naè, aè táá kuèntombïì neè woweèe. E m vúè a ba' aègee Jisoès tá e bo baa ye nje nyoèr.	While he was still speaking, behold, a multitude, and he who was called Judas, one of the twelve, was leading them. He came near to Jesus to kiss him.
A mbuèu ce woweèe a túr ñger aè rtáá kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè' Nyúè, ce faè' neè ye mbe yeâ ndaèp neètú' ba neèmootïì. Ñwáè ce e cu mbe kaèbaèraè' be ba a woweèe, súèti woweèe faè dïì' yuu mo' yi bo joèo woweèe ka'.	Therefore they are before the throne of God, they serve him day and night in his temple. He who sits on the throne will spread his tabernacle over them.
Yèr ŋkʉʉ tʉr bcìndap.	Our chief has messengers.
AÈde' ñgwa ñwáè cu neè yi tu ka'. Ñwáè ce e túr ñger mbe yeâ nduè yu nduu yïì. AÈde' nduu ñwáè cu neè yi tu ka'. Ñwáè ce e túr ñger mbe yeâ nduè yu ñgwa yïì.	The wife doesn't have authority over her own body, but the husband. Likewise also the husband doesn't have authority over his own body, but the wife.
Weèr aè byáè' rkwe Jisoès nje weâr mnyoèr aè nfeè' wááwá, tá li ryoèñ li bo yááti nje weâr mnyoèr foñ.	always carrying in the body the putting to death of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus may also be revealed in our body.
E laa ená woweèe a laa tá beèe anaè a cute aè mjáá aè bkúr aè bkúr.	He commanded them that everyone should sit down in groups on the green grass.
“Buu wááwá ce weèe ce yá na, nfeè' moè' be keè ba tá luèr mo' cu nje Ndap Nyúè ca ka'. A be keè káèáshi vi wááwá.”	As for these things which you see, the days will come, in which there will not be left here one stone on another that will not be thrown down.
Jisoès aè ma'shïì ye ená e du mbe yeâ ndaèp, a laa neè ye ená e fa keèr duè aè múè la' ka'.	"He sent him away to his house, saying, ""Don't enter into the village, nor tell anyone in the village."""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè aè ka' ce yu' yuu ce m ce laèa, ce geèe yi, baná rkwe li be joèo ye ka'.”	"Most certainly, I tell you, if a person keeps my word, he will never see death."""
E ka' kuè fúú enjep roè, Yú' yi ku lor ye a du aègho aè ntee rïìñ.	Immediately the Spirit drove him out into the wilderness.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' weèe aè m ku bii aè túè'nji, Sataèn aè m ce bo' weèe aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá, a gee weèe aè ce caè'ni mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ce vi ke laèa ka'.	You know that when you were heathen, you were led away to those mute idols, however you might be led.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M be bipshi yuu mo'sir neè weèe. Weèe aè ka' beesïî, baná m suñ weèe ñwáè ce e fa máè ñger aè rgeèe buu ca.	"Jesus said to them, ""I will ask you one question. Answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things."
Yuu ce aède' weèr kwa'shïì aègho, lu'shi aègho, ker naatu aègho kuèntombïì neè yïìseèe Tata Jisoès aè nfeè' ce e be vúè naè, yu ba ká caa efa weèe?	For what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Isn't it even you, before our Lord Jesus at his coming?
AÈ m ba efa rkáè' weèe aè ce geèe boèñboñ seê. AÈ geèe ba nda, weèe aè ka' borni efa rgeèe yuu mini?	You were running well! Who interfered with you that you should not obey the truth?
Wee weèe ce lu'shi, tá seèe lu'shi bsïìp.	In the same way, you also rejoice, and rejoice with me.
Wèr à koo kyɛŋ ŋgwe màna.	We caught a stray dog down there.
Ñwáè wááwá ce e byemi ená Jisoès yu Kraêis, ñgaèñ yu muu Nyúè. Ñwáè wááwá ce e koèñ tar muu, koèñ muu anaè foñ.	Whoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is born of God. Whoever loves the Father also loves the child who is born of him.
Woweèe a ka' tuu neèñguu roè, a cúú keñ aèwaâa roè, a ba seè'ni ba aè ñgoâñ Gáènásaráèt.	When they had crossed over, they came to land at Gennesaret, and moored to the shore.
M ce lu'shi magoèr aèmboè ñwáè Tataê, njobeè' máè yá ená weèe aè ker kuushi a ja' máè aèmboè weèe aè m ce jaè' entoèmbïì naè. Weèe aè m ku ce ne kuushi máè, a ka' buu ba njïì aè rjaè' máè.	But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at length you have revived your thought for me; in which you did indeed take thought, but you lacked opportunity.
Beèe wááwá aè ñgoâñ Gáèrasaè a m laèa ená Jisoès duê, njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp magoèr seê. Yi ka' ba wa'a, e niñ mbe keñ tá e bo kúti.	All the people of the surrounding country of the Gadarenes asked him to depart from them, for they were very much afraid. He entered into the boat, and returned.
“M ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm seè'ni na aèmboè Yú' Rara yi laèa ená m duê, a ke' riñ yuu ce yi be duè koni máè aèfo ka'.	Now, behold, I go bound by the Spirit to Jerusalem, not knowing what will happen to me there;
AÈde' ñwáè ce a ce yá'ni ye caa yïì ñwáè ryá'nïì ka'. AÈde' ñwáè rfaè' caa yïì masaè ka'.	"A disciple is not above his teacher, nor a servant above his lord.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	25	Yi yu yáánïì ená ñwáè yá'ni buu ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e yá'ni ye buu anaè, tá ñwáè rfaè' ba aèmboè yïì masaè. A ka' too masaè ñwáè ndap ená Básábuèl (Sataèn), baná a be too beèe embe ndaèp yïì ená ká?”	It is enough for the disciple that he be like his teacher, and the servant like his lord. If they have called the master of the house Beelzebul, how much more those of his household!
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	26	“Baná weèe fa wáp woweèe ka' njobeè' yuu mo' yi yu ce a tá'shi ce yi be keèe buu efa ryááti aèwañ ka', yuu mo' yi ba ce a súèti ce beèe a be keèe buu efa rrïìñ ka'.	Therefore don't be afraid of them, for there is nothing covered that will not be revealed; and hidden that will not be known.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	27	Buu ce m ce suñ weèe neètú', suñ neè aè mmir wañ. Buu ce a cúèúni neè weèe, suñ neè embe btu mndap.	What I tell you in the darkness, speak in the light; and what you hear whispered in the ear, proclaim on the housetops.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	28	Weèe fa wáp beèe ce a ke yú ñwáè wáá, moo aè ryú ryoèñ ñwáè laèr naè ka'. Wáp neè ba ñwáè ce aède' e yú ryoèñ ba nyor njep mor.	Don't be afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. Rather, fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in Gehenna.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	10	29	Mboè a ke fyeèni bbe' bbaa aè fraâñ mmbaa a? AÈde' moè' efa bbe' ca gwe aè nsheè ce yeè Ta aè buu efa rbyemïì ka'.	Aren't two sparrows sold for an assarion coin? Not one of them falls on the ground apart from your Father's will,"
M ce lu'shi njobeè' aède' m lá ntee njep weèe neè mini-ñwáè.	I rejoice that in everything I am confident concerning you.
Nyúè aè m koèñ ená e gee tá yïì beèe a yá ená rboèñ efa nsuñ ce e caèa buu wááwá na li yu neè beèe enje jáá foñ. Nsuñ ce e geèe seèe aè riñ na yu ená Jisos Kraâis yu njep weâe mntee, yi ka' ba wa'a, weèe aè riñ ená weèe be koni ñgúè' moè' efa foèo Nyúè.	to whom God was pleased to make known what are the riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory;
Ñwáè aè ka' ce laèa ená e byemi neè Nyúè, ke' ghashi li rlee ka', baná e bo' yi tu. Li rbyemïì anaè li yu aè cicïì.	If anyone among you thinks himself to be religious while he doesn't bridle his tongue, but deceives his heart, this man's religion is worthless.
Máè m ba mbaè mmbo Yú' Rara, ncïìndap Nyúè aè lor máè a du aègho mbe tu ma rtuèu ce li m saèp seê. Weèr ye aè ka' baè' mbo, e duñshïì máè Jáèrusaláèm ce yu rla' rrara ce li m loè ese Nyúè, aèmboè li ce suèu embe buèu.	He carried me away in the Spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
Jus a m byemi yap yu ená ñwáè anaè aè m be fep a ka' lo a ce yá buu ka', caar woweèe a ká' yïì ta ba yïì maê,	The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him, that he had been blind, and had received his sight, until they called the parents of him who had received his sight,
Wɛ̌ kwàʼshi enɛ mmir mmii mi ke yɛ buu kaʼ a?	Do you think that his own eyes do not see?
Pol aè ka' loè ená e ce laèa, Gaèliyoè aè laa enáê, “Yu' ka neè lá Juês! Weèe aè ka' ba ce laèa ená Pol aè geèe yuu mo' bebep káè e bú' ncir mo' tatap áè, máè ba loèr nfeè', yu' yuu ce weèe ce laèa.	"But when Paul was about to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, ""If indeed it were a matter of wrong or of wicked crime, you Jews, it would be reasonable that I should bear with you;"
E m vúè a yá máè, a táá a máâ geñ a laa enáê, ‘Nfúraâ Soêl, yá buu.’ Máè yá buu aè nfeè' anaè, a yá ye aèmboè e táá.	came to me, and standing by me said to me, 'Brother Saul, receive your sight!' In that very hour I looked up at him.
Ntoʼ enje Mbòr yu ŋayaŋ.	Mbot palace is unenclosed.
Bkar waê, baná m ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe fa túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ka'.	Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
[M ce loo máná tá yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe wááwá aè ntee boèñboñ. Yi yu wa'a.]	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all! Amen.
Btu mntáè' ca a m ko'ndoñ neè Josáèf, a fyeni ye aè to' Ijïìp. Geewa'a Nyúè aè m ba a ye,	"The patriarchs, moved with jealousy against Joseph, sold him into Egypt. God was with him,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	10	a ja' ye efa yïì ñgá' wááwá, a gee Fároè ce e m ba ñkúú aè to' Ijïìp aè túr ye aè ntee boèñboñ, a gee e yáátïì ñwáè bfee a yeâ bsii. Yi ka' ba wa'a, e gee ye aè ñwáè rsa' aè to' Ijïìp ker ba mbe yeâ ndaèp.	and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh, king of Egypt. He made him governor over Egypt and all his house.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	11	“Njeè aè m koo aè ñgoâñ Ijïìp wááwá ba aè ñgoâñ Kánaèn foñ, ñgá' aè ba seê, viseèe bta a ke' túr yuu ye ka'.	Now a famine came over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction. Our fathers found no food.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	12	Jakoèp aè ka' yu' ená byee vi yu aè to' Ijïìp, e tuu viseèe bta aè nfeè' entombïì.	But when Jacob heard that there was grain in Egypt, he sent out our fathers the first time.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	13	Woweèe a ka' kúti keèr duè aè nfeè' embenjïì, Josáèf aè gee woweèe a riñ ye, Fároè aè lo a riñ ndap Josáèf.	On the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and Joseph's race was revealed to Pharaoh.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	14	Josáèf aè tuu beèe ená a du vúè neè Jakoèp ce aè m ba yïì taê, ker ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp ce a m ba beèe ncoèp-ta-aè-mnsaèambaê.	Joseph sent, and summoned Jacob, his father, and all his relatives, seventy-five souls.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	15	Jakoèp aè m duè aè to' Ijïìp. E m kwe, viseèe bta caè a kweñgeèr foñ.	Jacob went down into Egypt, and he died, himself and our fathers,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	16	Woweèe a ka' kweñger, a lor woweèe a kúti aègho aè rla' Shákïìm a tuñ njep rsheè ce Abraèham aè m yuu neè mbaèa ese boo Hamoèr.	and they were brought back to Shechem, and laid in the tomb that Abraham bought for a price in silver from the children of Hamor of Shechem.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	17	“Nfeè' mkaè'ni ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè Abraèham naè aè ka' ce gháá, beèe ca a ku', a yaa aè ñgoâñ Ijïìp,	But as the time of the promise came close which God had sworn to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,"
M ce laa neè weèe ená ñwáè ce e ka' suñ aè bsii beèe ená e yu yaè ñwáè, baná Muu Ñwáè be suñ aèmboè ye foñ aè bsii bcïìndap Nyúè.	"I tell you, everyone who confesses me before men, him will the Son of Man also confess before the angels of God;
Luke	Luêk	12	9	Ñwáè ce e ka' máñni máè aè bsii beèe baná m be keè máñni ye aè bsii bcïìndap Nyúè foñ.	but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the angels of God.
Luke	Luêk	12	10	Ñwáè aè ka' laa yuu mo' bebep kuu Muu Ñwáè baná a be foèosi ye. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e ka' bepsi rlii Yú' Rara baná a be foèosi ñgaèñ ka'.	Everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but those who blaspheme against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven.
Luke	Luêk	12	11	A ka' lor weèe du aègho aè mndap mloo, káè neè ñgaâa rsa' ce a túr ñger naè áè, weèe fa ce kwaè'shi ená weèe be duè beèesi káè laèa wee ká lá ka',	When they bring you before the synagogues, the rulers, and the authorities, don't be anxious how or what you will answer, or what you will say;
Luke	Luêk	12	12	njobeè' Yú' Rara yi be fa weèe blaèa ce yáánïì aè rlaèa aè nfeè' anaè.”	for the Holy Spirit will teach you in that same hour what you must say."
Yi yu ená seèe ja' viseèe mnyor. M be túr ñger njo' le rbyemïì tá weèe túr ñger njo' la rbyemïì.	that is, that I with you may be encouraged in you, each of us by the other's faith, both yours and mine.
E ba aè nfeè' moè' beèe a naa weèr, e ba aè nfeè' moè' a coosïì weèr. E ba aè nfeè' moè' beèe a laa buu bbebep aèmboè weèr, e ba aè nfeè' moè' a laa buu bboèñboñ. Beèe a loè lor weèr aèmboè ñgaâa mnde' wa'a, weèr ku ce laèa yer yu ba yuu mini.	by glory and dishonor, by evil report and good report; as deceivers, and yet true;
Bwee bvi yû.	We have gathered all the cups.
Woweèe a ku ce bipshi neè ye ená e laèa yi ená ká lá? E naa nyor mbekïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè ka' ba a weâe mú ce e m be gee yuu bebep ka', baná ñgaèñ túú njeñwáè ca neè luèr entombïì.”	"But when they continued asking him, he looked up and said to them, ""He who is without sin among you, let him throw the first stone at her."""
Wèr à toosi kʉ̀.	We have twisted the rope.
“Yú' Tata yi yu weèr ye, njobeè' Nyúè aè ce máè ená m fe'shi nsuñ mboèñmboñ neè ñgaâa fuèp. E tuu máè ená m du suñ beèe ce a yu mbe shañ ená nfeè' aè gháá ce a be fúr woweèe efa shañ, tá beèe ce a feèp a yá buu, tá beèe ce beèe a ce jar neè woweèe a luñ efa ñgá',	"The Spirit of the Lord is on me, because he has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to proclaim release to the captives, recovering of sight to the blind, to deliver those who are crushed,
Luke	Luêk	4	19	ker suñ aèmboè nfeè' ce Tata Nyúè be ghoèni yïì beèe.”	and to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord."
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a beesïì neè ye enáê, “Bráâd yi be ka' loè efá aè ntee rïìñ ca, ce aède' yi ghááteè aè ryañ woweèe?”	"His disciples answered him, ""From where could one satisfy these people with bread here in a deserted place?"""
E ka' laèa neè yïì nyor wa' wáá, a nati a du a yá yïì taê. A ka' nyáá aènjïìsaèp, yïì ta aè yá ye, a koosimnse neè ye, a cañ a baa ye nje nyoèr, a nyo'shi ye.	"He arose, and came to his father. But while he was still far off, his father saw him, and was moved with compassion, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kissed him.
Luke	Luêk	15	21	Muu yïì ca aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Yaè taê, máè geèe yuu bebep neè Nyúè, ba neè wáè foñ. M ker ghááte ce aède' aè too máè ená muu woè ka'.’	The son said to him, 'Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight. I am no longer worthy to be called your son.'
Luke	Luêk	15	22	Taèr aè laa neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, ‘Duè neè cárcár du lor mñgaèbúlaè vïû bboèñboñ vú aègho ma' ye aè nyoèr, fa ye tee kuè ntubo, yarsi ye blaba' aè mkuèu.	But the father said to his servants, 'Bring out the best robe, and put it on him. Put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet."
E ye baa àmnsòŋ.	He has eaten food without soup.
E gwe aè nsheè a yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ ce laèa neè ye enáê, “Soêl, Soêl, aè ce jar neè máè njoká?”	"He fell on the earth, and heard a voice saying to him, ""Saul, Saul, why do you persecute me?"""
caar tá m gee tá aè tár mo mkuèu mbenduè beèe ce a baèa wáè.”’	"until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.""'"
Yi yu aèmboè yes ce njeñwáè aè m loèr a fe' mkúèñ bráâd mñkaâa btaar, a top aègho caar mkúèñ anaè mi ko'.”	"It is like yeast, which a woman took and hid in three measures of flour, until it was all leavened."""
E m geèe buu ca tá beèe wááwá a bo yá buu boèñboñ ce e m geèe neè seèe ce seèe yu aèbee seèe Jisoès weèe, rïìñ yi ntee boèñboñ ce yi caèa ñger.	that in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus;
E ka' ce kwaè'shi aè rgeèe wa'a, a yá rlo aèmboè ncïìndap Tata Nyúè aè vúè a laa neè ye enáê, “Josáèf muu Dávïìd, fa wáp aè rloèr ñgwa woâ Máèári ka', njobeè' muu ce e yu njep yeâ rbúè naè aè loè ba ese Yú' Rara.	"But when he thought about these things, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, ""Joseph, son of David, don't be afraid to take to yourself Mary, your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit."
Jisoès aè m laèa buu ca neè woweèe aè nfeè' ce e m ce yá'ni mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a ba ba mbe dïì' ce a m ce fa rfa. Ñwáè moè' aè m koo ye ka' njobeè' yïì nfeè' aè m be gháá ka'.	Jesus spoke these words in the treasury, as he taught in the temple. Yet no one arrested him, because his hour had not yet come.
Beè'teè anaè yi yu ba aè múè rla' ka'. A ka' nyáèñ gráâp anaè bláá vi fúú enjo. Bsaèp efa gho vi m ba bkïìlomátaè mjeèe mtaar, rcoomïì efa gho li ba aèmboè rkoo rmo'sir.	The winepress was trodden outside of the city, and blood came out from the winepress, even to the bridles of the horses, as far as one thousand six hundred stadia.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè Yú' Rara yi gee Jisoès aè ce lu'shi seê, a laa enáê, “Taèr, Tata ce e túr rbuu ba nshe, m ce yoèñshi wáè njobeè' wáè súèti buu ca ese ñgaâa bfee, ba beèe ce a rïìñ buu, a duñshi vi ba neè boo bká'. ÁÈno Taèr, ca yu ba yuu ce wáè m ce yu' rboèñ aè rgeèe.”	"In that same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Holy Spirit, and said, ""I thank you, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that you have hidden these things from the wise and understanding, and revealed them to little children. Yes, Father, for so it was well-pleasing in your sight."""
Jisoès aè loâ aèfo, a caa aèwaâa roâ aè ñgoèñ Galeèleê, a ko' mbe rtuèu, a cu aè nsheè.	Jesus departed there, and came near to the sea of Galilee; and he went up into the mountain, and sat there.
A mbuèu ce a m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe ce a m kweñger, tá woweèe a bo cu aè yú' aèmboè Nyúè ce cu naè. Woweèe a be cu wa'a, ka' a m sa' woweèe aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ba njep ñgoèñ na, woweèe a kwe aèmboè beèe wááwá a ke kwe naè wa'a.	For to this end the Good News was preached even to the dead, that they might be judged indeed as men in the flesh, but live as to God in the spirit.
Ka' e m ba muu Nyúè wa'a, e m rïìñ aèmboè aède' e yu'nïì neè Nyúè ba njo' ñgá' ce e m loè a yá.	though he was a Son, yet learned obedience by the things which he suffered.
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ mo', Pitaè ba Joân a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè nyúè taar neèmootïì. AÈ m ba nfeè' ce a m ce duè mbo ce geèe rloo.	Peter and John were going up into the temple at the hour of prayer, the ninth hour.
Buu ca wááwá vi m ba wa'a tá yuu ce Tata Nyúè aè m laèa njïì enjep yïì ñwáè ncep ntuu yi bo ghááte njo. E m laèa enáê,	Now all this has happened, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying,
Buu e ke caŋ ce loʼŋger.	When a squirrel is running, it dodges from one end to the other.
Fa kuè no ba mdip caè'caè' ka', no mú mruè' múcaèr tá mi bo jaè' wáè a rbúè ce li ce fa wáè ñgá', aè ce yañ cá'cá' se naè.	Be no longer a drinker of water only, but use a little wine for your stomach's sake and your frequent infirmities.
Weèr aè ka' cu aèfo aè mú mnoâñ mo', ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m ce too ená AÈgaboès aè vúâ aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.	As we stayed there some days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
Shɛɛ e ke nìʼ sê.	Shey always delays.
E m laèa wa'a, aè rduèñshi njáèá rkwe ce Pitaè be keè kwe, kuè'si Nyúè aègho. Cena yi ka' mïì wáá, e laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu.”	"Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God. When he had said this, he said to him, ""Follow me."""
Woweèe a m vúè a yá bár ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, ku' beèe a sir woweèe, ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ce sár nsár a woweèe.	Coming to the disciples, he saw a great multitude around them, and scribes questioning them.
Saimúèn aè beesïì enáê, “Masaè, weèr aè faè' neètú' tatap seê, caar túè' aè raa, a ke' koo yuu ka'. Geewa'a, aèmboè wáè laèa na, baná m be maè' mraa njep roè.”	"Simon answered him, ""Master, we worked all night, and took nothing; but at your word I will let down the net."""
Jisoès aè ker du a ker loo aèmboè e ba loo naè.	Again he went away, and prayed, saying the same words.
E m ba du mbe dïû' rara nfeè' aèñgoo, e m ba yá ñgá' foñ nfeè' aèñgoo ká' embe nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ. E m geèe wa' ka'. E vúè ba nfeè' moè'sir aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì na, a lor yïì nyor a tañshi tañshïì aègho tá e bo siñsi buu bbebep ce beèe a geèe, nfeseè.	or else he must have suffered often since the foundation of the world. But now once at the end of the ages, he has been revealed to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.
“M ce loo ba neè woweèe caè'caè' ka', m ce loo foñ neè beèe wááwá ce a be byemi neè máè njobeè' wap blaèa.	Not for these only do I pray, but for those also who believe in me through their word,
Máè suñ weèe buu ca tá nfeè' ka' gháá, vi koni, tá weèe bo kuushi ená máè m suñ weèe. “Máè m suñ weèe buu ca efa rkáè' ka' njobeè' seèe aè m ku ba.	But I have told you these things, so that when the time comes, you may remember that I told you about them. I didn't tell you these things from the beginning, because I was with you.
Yi boèñ ená seèe ce seèe yu bleebeèe aè buu Nyúè seèe túr njáèá mkwaè'shïì ca. Yuu mo' yi ka' ba aègho ce weèe ce kwaè'shi jáá baná Nyúè be naèshi yuu anaè neè weèe.	Let us therefore, as many as are perfect, think this way. If in anything you think otherwise, God will also reveal that to you.
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú' seê, Jisoès aè nyáá a du aè dïì' mo' ce beèe a m ba ka', a gee rloo aèfo.	Early in the morning, while it was still dark, he rose up and went out, and departed into a deserted place, and prayed there.
Caè'ni neè bfúr wee, baa woweèe nje nyoèr aè rlii Jisoès. Bcor wááwá vi caè'ni weèe.	Greet one another with a holy kiss. The assemblies of Christ greet you.
“Yú' bebep yi ke fúú enjep ñwáè kashi aè ñgoâñ yuur aè rroèo dïû' rlúèshïì. Yi ka' roo yá ka',	But the unclean spirit, when he is gone out of the man, passes through waterless places, seeking rest, and doesn't find it.
Pitaè aè m káè' a ce ye byee a beèe enje jáá weèe. Jáms aè ka' tuu Jus mo' ená a vú yá Pitaè, Pitaè aè bornïì efa rye byee a beèe enje jáá caè, a fúr yïì nyor efa múè woweèe. E m geèe wa'a njobeè' e m ce wáp Jus mo' ce a m ce laèa ená ñwáè aè ka' tá geèe búè ka', ñgaèñ ba ñwáè rbyemïì ka'.	For before some people came from James, he ate with the Gentiles. But when they came, he drew back and separated himself, fearing those who were of the circumcision.
Woowèe a koʼ kùna.	They have gone up there.
Ca yu yuu báèá ka', njobeè' Sataèn ye ye e ke loè yááti aèmboè ncïìndap Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè rraa.	And no wonder, for even Satan masquerades as an angel of light.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol weèr Timotïì ce weèr yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis. Weèr ce sañ neè weèe ce weèe yu beèe Nyúè aè rla' Fileèpaêi, ce weèe aè tarshi weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe, a ker ce sañ neè wee btu embe coêr, ker ba bdikïìn.	Paul and Timothy, servants of Jesus Christ; To all the saints in Christ Jesus who are at Philippi, with the overseers and servants:
Máè bú ghup. Ñwáè ce e be jaè' máè efa nyor ce e be geèe tá m kwe na yu nda?	What a wretched man I am! Who will deliver me out of the body of this death?
E m kwe a seâe btuè tá e bo fúr seèe efa buu bbebep, keèr geèe tá seèe ba brara enjep ntee, ba yïì beèe ce a ce lu'shi aè rgeèe ba buu bboèñboñ.	who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify for himself a people for his own possession, zealous for good works.
Buu ca vi be keè bú tá aè ku cu nfeseè. Vi be kúti brúèú aèmboè bcáè' wa'a.	They will perish, but you continue. They all will grow old like a garment does.
Siŋ cu mbe ce.	The bird is sitting up in the tree.
Jisoès aè riñ yuu ce woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi, a koo mú ghaèrñwáè a tár a yeâ geñ,	Jesus, perceiving the reasoning of their hearts, took a little child, and set him by his side,
Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe aè m nyáá aè ntee rïìñ, a ce feè'shi ená beèe a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep tá a baptir woweèe, tá Nyúè bo foèosi woweèe.	John came baptizing in the wilderness and preaching the baptism of repentance for forgiveness of sins.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, Tata be vúè tá e búú beèe búèú aèmboè nyáèá wa'a. Be keè ba aè nfeè' anaè tá rbuu li coêo, ce barñger aèmboè mor wa'a, bú. Buu embe buèu wááwá vi be keè she, tá ñgoèñ foñ ba buu wááwá enjep ñgoèñ vi bú.	But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night; in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will be dissolved with fervent heat, and the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up.
AÈsayaè aè m ce laèa buu ca wa'a njobeè' e m yá foèo Jisoès, a ce laèa ba aèmboè ye.	Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and spoke of him.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a baashïì bbábá' bráâd ba btete nca, vi ruu aè mñkaèa ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	They took up twelve baskets full of broken pieces and also of the fish.
Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, ker ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè weèr foñ, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, ker fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Ñwáè moè' efa seâe mú ce cu neè yi tu ka'. Ñwáè moè' efa seâe mú ce kwe neè yi tu ka'.	For none of us lives to himself, and none dies to himself.
Woweèe a ka' geèe buu wááwá ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená a be keè geèe neè ye naè, a suusi ye embe ce, a lá njep rsheè.	When they had fulfilled all things that were written about him, they took him down from the tree, and laid him in a tomb.
E túr aè rba ba ñwáè rbyemïû nfi ka', buwa'laèr e lo naatu, gwe mnsa' aèmboè Sataèn aè m gweè naè.	not a new convert, lest being puffed up he fall into the same condemnation as the devil.
A ka' ye ñkaè' baè' tïìtïìyáá, Jisoès aè du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a ce yá'ni beèe mbo.	But when it was now the midst of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.
Bfúr waê, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe lor nfeè' neè beèe ce a ce vúè neè ñgaèpni a ker ce daè'si beèe foñ naè. Woweèe a ce geèe jáá efa yuu ce a yá'ni weèe. Sïìr neè njïì neè woweèe.	Now I beg you, brothers, look out for those who are causing the divisions and occasions of stumbling, contrary to the doctrine which you learned, and turn away from them.
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' beèe ce a teèe btu a yu goèr seê, lañlañ beâe aè múè ñgaâa ñgeèe búè. Njáèá beèe ca a yu ñgaâa laèa buu bcicïì, a ce bo' beèe neè wap blaèa anaè.	For there are also many unruly men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those of the circumcision,
E dù a cu tètè sê.	He has gone and stayed for a very long time.
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' ce vúè aèbee, Jisoès aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê,	Now while the Pharisees were gathered together, Jesus asked them a question,
Govanoè aè ka' yá yuu ce yi koni, a byemi yuu ce Sol aè m laèa. E m báèá ryá'nïì ce a m yá'ni du kuu Tata na seê.	Then the proconsul, when he saw what was done, believed, being astonished at the teaching of the Lord.
Baná m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe ye yuu. Weèe aè ka' tá ye yuu ka', weèe luñ ka'. Mbúè nyúè'tu embe tu ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú be duè aè yuu ka'.”	"Therefore I beg you to take some food, for this is for your safety; for not a hair will perish from any of your heads."""
Ñgaâa ntaa ca a m ce geèe ntaa neè buu ce a m geèe neè gul ba selvaè ba bluèr ce vi m ce laè'ñger. Ntaa bcáè' ce vi m túr ncoèo jáá jáèá jáá a luu ntaa se naè aè ker ba aègho ka'. Ntaa buu embe ndaèp ce a m geèe neè mntaañguu ce vi m ce rúèú bboèñboñ seê, ba vïì ce a m geèe neè msoèñ juè', ba vïì ce a m soèp, ba buu ce a m geèe neè bco' bboèñboñ ba bluèr, aè ba aègho ka'.	merchandise of gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, silk, scarlet, all expensive wood, every vessel of ivory, every vessel made of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble;
AÈ ka' ba nyúè moè', weèr aè ce duè aè rgeèe rloo. A tarte weèr muunje moè' ce e m ba ñkwaèa. Njáèá yú' mo' yi m ba njep ye, a ce geèe e ce suñ beèe buu ce vi bii ka' ba. E m ce kap ku' mbaèa neè beèe ce a m yuu ye seê, njobeè' e m ce suñ beèe buu anaè.	It happened, as we were going to prayer, that a certain girl having a spirit of divination met us, who brought her masters much gain by fortune telling.
Baná seèe aè ba ce koèñ beèe, ce laèa ba yuu ce yi yu mini, ce geèe yi, tá seèe bo kuè' ba aèmboè Jisos Kraâis ce e yu tu naè, aè mnjïì wááwá.	but speaking truth in love, we may grow up in all things into him, who is the head, Christ;
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Mboâñtu mi yu ba neè beèe ce a ce yu' blaâa Nyúè, ce geèe yuu ce Nyúè ce laèa.”	"But he said, ""On the contrary, blessed are those who hear the word of God, and keep it."""
Yú' wááwá ce yi ka' tá byemi wa' ka', baná yi loè ese Nyúè ka'. Yú' cena yu yú' ñwáè ce e baèa Kraâis ce weèe aè m yu' ená yi ce vúè. Yi yu war njep ñgoèñ seè'ni.	and every spirit who doesn't confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is not of God, and this is the spirit of the Antichrist, of whom you have heard that it comes. Now it is in the world already.
njobeè' nfeè' ca be ba nfeè' ce Nyúè be kúsi mcucu' aètu buu bbebep ce beèe a m geèe, tá yuu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi bo ghááte njo.	For these are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may be fulfilled.
M ce lu'shi njobeè' weèe, máná máè mú ba aèfo ka', tá weèe bo byemi neè máè. Baná seèe du yá ye.”	"I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that you may believe. Nevertheless, let's go to him."""
Máè m jáèr seê. Mdip mi sáni loèr máè, byáèá a fa máè ñgá', yaè beèe efa máâ to' a fa máè ñgá', beèe enje jáá a fa máè ñgá'. Máè m yá ñgá' aè múè la', a yá ñgá' aè rïìñ, a yá ñgá' njep rdip rgoèr, a ker yá ñgá' mbe mmbo beèe ce a bo' beèe ená a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì naè.	I have been in travels often, perils of rivers, perils of robbers, perils from my countrymen, perils from the Gentiles, perils in the city, perils in the wilderness, perils in the sea, perils among false brothers;
Wáè ka' byemi ená Nyúè aè kani wáè efa rgeèe buu ca ka', aè ma'shïì tá ku rïìñ ba wáè weèe Nyúè. Ñwáè ce e ka' riñ ená yuu ce e ce geèe yi yu yáánïì, yi ntee yi ce fa ye ñgá' aè yuu anaè ka', baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè rboâñtu.	Do you have faith? Have it to yourself before God. Happy is he who doesn't judge himself in that which he approves.
Bbyeèñgeê, yu'ni neè neè bduu wee aèmboè beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Tata Jisoès a ba geèe.	Wives, be in subjection to your husbands, as is fitting in the Lord.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M be vúè geèe tá e ke'se.”	"Jesus said to him, ""I will come and heal him."""
Seèe ka' laa ená seèe woweèe yu aèbee, kúti ce jáèr aè túè'nji baná seèe ce nya' mnde', a ke' ce cu rcu ce li yu mini ka'.	If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie, and don't tell the truth.
njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ba neè brara njobeè' m yu nrara.”	"because it is written, ""You shall be holy; for I am holy."""
Blaâa Nyúè vi m duè kuèntombïì, ñgoo beèe ce a m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè ku' seê. Ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a m yu' blaâa rbyemïì ca a byemi, a m ba goèr.	The word of God increased and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem exceedingly. A great company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
M ce yá ñgá' ca mbe shañ aèmboè ñwáè ce e bú' lá ncir wa'a njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ anaè. Ka' a kur máè neè bkwaèñ wa'a, aède' a kur blaâa Nyúè ka'.	in which I suffer hardship to the point of chains as a criminal. But God's word isn't chained.
Rjɛ̀r li kʉni.	The journey has been postponed.
A ka' vúè neè woweèe, a tár woweèe mbe múè kansuèr. Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè bipshïì buu neè woweèe.	When they had brought them, they set them before the council. The high priest questioned them,
Ñwáè ce e ka' baa nfúr yïì, baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè nyú beèe. Weèe yi weená ñwáè nyú beèe aè koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè ka'.	Whoever hates his brother is a murderer, and you know that no murderer has eternal life remaining in him.
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr yuu, baná a be fa ye buu moè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr yuu ka' baná a be koo ka' mú yïì ce e ce kwaè'shi ená e túr naè ese ye.”	"For whoever has, to him will more be given, and he who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away from him."""
Tu yïû goèr yi laa neè ye ená e duê. E duè e fa suñ ñwáè moè' yuu ce e suñ ye naè ka'.	"So the commanding officer let the young man go, charging him, ""Tell no one that you have revealed these things to me."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr yuu, baná a be keèr fa ye buu moè', tá e misi túr buu goèr. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr yuu ka', baná a be koo, ka' mú yïì ce e túr naè ese ye.	For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have abundance, but whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he has.
Buu ce m ce sañ na vi yu mini. Nyúè rïìñ ená m ce nya' ba mnde' ka'.	Now about the things which I write to you, behold, before God, I'm not lying.
Jisoès aè ka' ba a woweèe aè nfeè' anaè, a laa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fa loâ aè rlaè' Jáèrusaláèm ka'. E m laèa enáê, “Cu neè ce ke' yuu ce Nyúè Taèr aè m kaè' neè weèe aè ba yuu ce máè m suñ weèe foñ naè.	"Being assembled together with them, he commanded them, ""Don't depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which you heard from me."
Máè ka' yu' wa'a, a gwe njeptii ncïìndap Nyúè anaè ená m bo gú'shi neè ye. E laa neè máè enáê, “Fa geèe wa' ka'. M ku ba ñwáè ce m ce geèe rfaè' Nyúè aèmboè wáâ geèe foñ naè. M ku ba ñwáè rfaè' neè Nyúè aèmboè weèe bfúr wo weèe yu naè. M ku ba aèmboè beèe wááwá ce a táá tatap, a ce laèa ená Jisoès yu yaèp Tataê. Gú'shi neè ba neè Nyúè caè'caè'. Nsuñ Jisoès yu ntee efa ntuu Nyúè.”	"I fell down before his feet to worship him. He said to me, ""Look! Don't do it! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers who hold the testimony of Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy."""
Kɛʼ e nyù ce Tantoʼ à m cɛp mɛ̀ nà bsɛ̀ bvi ke koo mɛ̀ à rcàʼni ye sê.	Since the day that Tantoh insulted me, I am always very reluctant to greet him.
Muu mòʼ à bipshi mɛ̀ a?	Has a certain child asked for me?
Máèári ce ndur yïû Lasoèroès aè m ce yañ na, aè m ba Máèári ce e m cu'ni mgúr aè mkuèu Tata Jisoès, a siñsi neè yi nyúè'tu naè.	It was that Mary who had anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother, Lazarus, was sick.
AÈmboè m ce yá ñgá' a weâe btuè seè'ni na, m ce lu'shi. M ce yá ñgá' aèmboè Jisos Kraâis aè m yá aètu cor ce e yu yïì nyor naè. M ce yá ñgá' ca wa'a, ryañ ce m ce yu' li ce mïìsi ñgá' ce Jisoès aè m yá, e bátïì naè.	Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake, and fill up on my part that which is lacking of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the assembly;
Jisoès neè yi tu nyor aè m be laa ená a ke yu'ni neè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè fa yeâ ñgoèñ ka'.	For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own country.
E cu aè nsheè, a ká' yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rba ñwáè e kuèntombïì, baná e be loèr yi tu aè ñwáè embaè lúèsimbuèu, ba aè ñwáè rfaè' neè beèe wááwá.”	"He sat down, and called the twelve; and he said to them, ""If any man wants to be first, he shall be last of all, and servant of all."""
Woweèe a ka' yá, a riñ ená a ñwáè ce e m ce cu njep cuâu ñka' ce a m ce too ená Rboèñ, ce loo buu ese beèe naè. Woweèe a bááñgeèr, a túr yuu laèa ka', njo' yuu ce yi m koni anaè.	They recognized him, that it was he who used to sit begging for gifts for the needy at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. They were filled with wonder and amazement at what had happened to him.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè byemi seè'ni a?	"Jesus answered them, ""Do you now believe?"
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ ka' ba njo' yuu ce wáè laèa na, yú' nyúèrkaè' ca yi fúú enjep muu ghoè. Duè yo yu.”	"He said to her, ""For this saying, go your way. The demon has gone out of your daughter."""
Yi ka' ba ená buu bbebep ce seèe ce geèe, ce geèe beèe a ce yá ená Nyúè yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, seèe ka' laa seená ká? Waè' aède' seèe laa ená Nyúè aè ka' fa seèe ñgá' njo' buu bbebep ce seèe aè geèe baná e geèe yuu yáánïì ka' a? (M ce laèa ba aèmboè ñwáè.)	But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous who inflicts wrath? I speak like men do.
Ce ye baa.	Be eating the fufu.
Rraa anaè li ke raa aè túè'nji. Túè'nji aè m be liisi rraa anaè ka'.	The light shines in the darkness, and the darkness hasn't overcome it.
AÈmboè weèe yu brara njobeè' weèe aè yu'ni a gee buu mini, a koñ bfúr wee neè mini-ñwáè na, m ce laèa máná weèe koñni neè ye ntee-ñwáè.	Seeing you have purified your souls in your obedience to the truth through the Spirit in sincere brotherly affection, love one another from the heart fervently:
Woweèe a saa enjep rsheè a cañ, njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp, a ker jep foñ. Woweèe a laa yuu neè ñwáè ka' njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp.	They went out, and fled from the tomb, for trembling and astonishment had come on them. They said nothing to anyone; for they were afraid.
Beèe magoèr ce a m ba aè dïì' anaè a m byemi neè Jisoès.	Many believed in him there.
Mnoèñ vi ka' caèa aèñgoo, Jus a cuteè, a fa mntañ a ká' a ce roèo mi mkuèu.	When many days were fulfilled, the Jews conspired together to kill him,
Dù gwar ntaaŋguu ce e tɛɛ nà.	Go and cut down that stick.
Nyúè aè ker laa foñ enáê, ‘M be sa', fa ñgá' neè to' ce woweèe a ce faè' bkwaèa neè woweèe naè. Máâ geèe wa' wáá, tá woweèe a fúú aèfo, vúè loo neè máè aèfa na.’	I will judge the nation to which they will be in bondage,' said God, 'and after that will they come out, and serve me in this place.'
Yi ka' ba ená Nyúè aè m ce koèñ aè rduèñshi li rshentee, geèe tá beèe a bo yá yi ñger, a lo a kur ba ntee neè beèe ce a m geèe ntee yi bep ye, aè ba beèe ce yi m ba ená e be yúshi woweèe naè,	What if God, willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much patience vessels of wrath made for destruction,
Yú' Rara yi yá, wer weèr foñ aè yá ená yi yu boèñboñ ená weèr ker lá ntáèr mo' mbe weâe nduè caa efa mú mncir ce weèr be suñ weèe ená weèe lá na ka'.	For it seemed good to the Holy Spirit, and to us, to lay no greater burden on you than these necessary things:
E m laèa wa'a, ke' ba njobeè' e m ce koosimnse neè ñgaâa fuèp ka'. E m laèa wa'a njobeè' e m ba nyáèá. A ye ce e m ce láè yap mbaèa, a ce yáèá mo' enjo.	Now he said this, not because he cared for the poor, but because he was a thief, and having the money box, used to steal what was put into it.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Waè' weèe ce kwaè'shi weená beèe aè ñgoâñ Galeèle ca a m yá ñgá' ca wa'a yi ba ená woweèe a m ba yap ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a caa beèe wááwá aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a?	"Jesus answered them, ""Do you think that these Galileans were worse sinners than all the other Galileans, because they suffered such things?"
Nyúè ku bii kaè' ená aède' seèe vú mbe yïû dïû' rlúèshïì foñ. Baná seèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' moè' efa seèe lo buu efa rbaè' aè dïû' rlúèshïì anaè ka'.	Let us fear therefore, lest perhaps anyone of you should seem to have come short of a promise of entering into his rest.
Jisoès aè m ká' yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú a fa woweèe ñger aè rfúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe, ker ba aè rgeèe tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se.	He called the twelve together, and gave them power and authority over all demons, and to cure diseases.
A ka' geèe ku' buu bbáèá ce Nyúè aè m maè'shi ená e gee aè rlii nyaèa ca naè, a bo' beèe enjep ñgoèñ wááwá aègho. E m laèa ená a woweèe a gee blañ tá a bo gú'shi neè nyaèa ce a m gwaèr neè kaèafaè' e ke' kwe ka' naè.	He deceives my own people who dwell on the earth because of the signs he was granted to do in front of the beast; saying to those who dwell on the earth, that they should make an image to the beast who had the sword wound and lived.
Woweèe a roo aè ryá ená Jisoès be geèe tá e ke'se nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè lá, tá woweèe a bo sa' ye ená e bú' ncir.	They watched him, whether he would heal him on the Sabbath day, that they might accuse him.
Beèe enje jáá a m lïìp máè neè mmbaèñ nfeè' taar, beèe a túúshïì máè neè bluèr nfeè' moè'sir. Weèr aè ka' ce jáèr njep mdip mñgoèrñgoèr mbe bkeñ bgoèrgoèr, bkeñ anaè vi bep neè weèr, a coo njep roè nfeè' taar. Máè m cu njep rdip rgoèr káâ' aèñgaèptú' du ba' aèñgaèptú' moè'.	Three times I was beaten with rods. Once I was stoned. Three times I suffered shipwreck. I have been a night and a day in the deep.
Woweèe a ka' laèa wa'a, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe yu blúr, a ce sïìrni aè rbyemi yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa.	"He said to them, ""Foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!"
Mɛ̀ bɛ rfàʼ ca njobèʼ mɛ̀ mʉ ce vʉ̀ rfàʼ nfèʼsìp kaʼ.	I lost this job because I was not coming to work everyday.
Beèe a faè' neè weèe, weèe aè kanïì aè rlaè' woweèe. Yu' neè aèmboè woweèe a ce war ce gúèú weèe, woweèe a war teèteè, Nyúè ce e túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá aè yu'.	Behold, the wages of the laborers who mowed your fields, which you have kept back by fraud, cry out, and the cries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of Armies.
Nyúè aè ka' kuèu ñgoèñ, túè' aè sii.	Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land until the ninth hour.
Baná weèe fa ba blúr ka'. Rïìñ neè ba buu ce Tata Jisoès ce koèñ ená weèe geêe.	Therefore don't be foolish, but understand what the will of the Lord is.
m ker ghááte ce aède' aè too máè ená muu woè ka', loèr máè tá m ba ba aèmboè yoè ñwáè rfaè' moè'.’	"I am no more worthy to be called your son. Make me as one of your hired servants.""'"
E m duè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a lor bráâd ce a m fa neè Nyúè a ye, a fa bár neè beèe ce a woweèe a m ba. Ncir yi m byemi ená e ye ka', káè ená beèe ce e m ba a woweèe a ye foñ ka'. Beèe ce yi m ba ená a ye aè m ku ba ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.	how he entered into the house of God, and ate the show bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for those who were with him, but only for the priests?
Woweèe a yu beèe Isráèl. Nyúè aè m geèe woweèe a bo ba boo vi, a fa yi foèo neè woweèe. E m ye leè' a woweèe, a fa woweèe mncir. E m suñ woweèe aèmboè aède' woweèe a gee rloo. E m geèe mi mkaè'ni ba neè woweèe.	who are Israelites; whose is the adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the service, and the promises;
Nformi e ke barsi bèe bkòr sê.	Nformi usually urges people to fight.
Woweèe a koèñ aè rba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir Nyúè, a ke' riñ buu ce woweèe a ce laèa neè ntee-ñwáè ená vi yu mini naè ka'.	desiring to be teachers of the law, though they understand neither what they say, nor about what they strongly affirm.
Woweèe a beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “A m bi wáè njep múè buu bbebep, wáè ce roèo aè ryá'ni weèr a?” A ka' laèa wa'a, a juu ye embe ndaèp rloo.	"They answered him, ""You were altogether born in sins, and do you teach us?"" They threw him out."
Ndi à dù ntaa a kap mbàa sê.	Ndi went to the market and made a lot of profit.
E tʉr mbàa sèʼni.	He now has money.
Simïìyoèn aè ghonïì woweèe a laa neè yïì ma ce Máèári enáê, “Muu ca aè láè Nyúè tá e bo geèe tá beèe magoâr aè to' Isráèl a kweñger, keèr geèe tá beèe magoâr aè ñgoèñ anaè a natïî. E be ba ncoèo ce beèe magoèr a be koèñ ka', laèa bebep se aèmboè ye.	"and Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary, his mother, ""Behold, this child is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against."
Beèe ce a m laèa ená e geèe faèa naè a táá mbe koêr, a laa yuu mo' efa buu bbebep ce máè m ce kwaè'shi ená woweèe a be laèa aèmboè ye ka'.	Concerning whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought no charge of such things as I supposed;
Geewa'a, keñ be niñ nje múè nsaruñ, taèñte, táá aèwaâa rla' mo'.”	"But we must run aground on a certain island."""
E kʉr kwaa àmbò mbʉ waʼa.	He crushed the corn like a goat.
Máâ Taèr, máè laèa mánáê, Leè' ce m be ye weèr beèe Isráèl aè mnoèñ ce vi bii ka' ba naè yi yu ená m be geèe tá woweèe a kupse yap ntee, ce yu' rboèñ aè rláè wa mncir. M be ba yaèp Nyúè tá woweèe a ba yaè beèe.	"For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel. After those days, says the Lord; ""I will put my laws into their mind, I will also write them on their heart. I will be their God, and they will be my people."
Jisoès aè ka' yá yïì maê, ker ba ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu ce e m koèñ naè aèmboè woweèe a táá aètútú, e laa neè yïì ma enáê, “Njeñwáè yáê, a muu ghoè na.”	"Therefore when Jesus saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing there, he said to his mother, ""Woman, behold your son!"""
Beèe ce a m ce cïìñ ñkuânyaèm ca a cañseè, a du aè laè', a suñ buu ca wááwá, a ker suñ yuu ce yi m koni neè beèe ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m ba njep woweèe naè.	Those who fed them fled, and went away into the city, and told everything, including what happened to those who were possessed with demons.
E m ce duè mbe ndaèp rloo Jus aè mmbomntaa wááwá, a ce naèshi woweèe buu tá Jus ba Greâk ce a m ba mbo a bo byemi neè Jisoès.	He reasoned in the synagogue every Sabbath, and persuaded Jews and Greeks.
A be keè yo' ñwáè wááwá neè mgwañ ce yu ba mor.	For everyone will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt.
Waè' aè ce loèr ñgeâe boèñboñ ce Nyúè ce geèe neè beèe, a gee yuu mo' neè woweèe ka', a túr ntee múfáèá naè, aè yuu cicïì a? Mboè wáè rïìñ wáná Nyúè ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ ca neè wáè wa'a, a ce fa wáè fáñ tá aè bo kupse yo ñgeâe bebep a?	Or do you despise the riches of his goodness, forbearance, and patience, not knowing that the goodness of God leads you to repentance?
Ñwáè ce e ka' tá koni weèe káè yu' yuu ce weèe be laèa ka', weèe ka' ce fúú embe ndaèp ñwáè anaè, káâ aè rla' anaè áè, weèe kashïì nfúènfú efa weâe mkuèu.	Whoever doesn't receive you, nor hear your words, as you go out of that house or that city, shake off the dust from your feet.
Fa fa yo cuèu njep múè mnsár ka'. AÈde' mnsár anaè vi gee ñwáè riñ Nyúè ka', vi loè gee beèe ce a ce sár vi a misïì máñni Nyúè máñni.	But shun empty chatter, for they will proceed further in ungodliness,
Ntee yi m bep máè neè woweèe, máè ye leè' máná aède' woweèe a ke ba' a ya dïû' rlúèshïì tá a bo lúèshi ka'.”	"as I swore in my wrath, 'They will not enter into my rest.'"""
Blaâa Tata vi m duè aè ñgoèñ anaè wááwá.	The Lord's word was spread abroad throughout all the region.
A ka' laèa wa'a, a lip ye neè ñke' mbe tuè, a ce ye neè mce, a gú'shi a ce bo'shi ená a ce caè'ni ye.	They struck his head with a reed, and spat on him, and bowing their knees, did homage to him.
Anaès ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba Kaifaès, ba Joân ba AÈláèksandaè, ker ba beèe embe ndúè' ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a m ba aèfo foñ.	Annas the high priest was there, with Caiaphas, John, Alexander, and as many as were relatives of the high priest.
Rdip li bàati.	The river has overflown.
Josáèf aè koo gúèú ñwáè, a kur njep ma cáâ' boèñboñ,	Joseph took the body, and wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
Jisoès aè m yá ená ku' beèe a ce vúèse, e waa yú' bebep anaè a laa enáê, “Wáâ yú' ce yi ke geèe ñwáè e fuñreè ker ba lúr, máè laa neè wáè: fúú enjep ye. Fa keèr niñ njep ye nyúè moè' ka'.”	"When Jesus saw that a multitude came running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to him, ""You mute and deaf spirit, I command you, come out of him, and never enter him again!"""
Kuè ce gee neè ba yuu ce m ce geèe aèmboè má máè ce geèe ba buu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m ce geèe.	Be imitators of me, even as I also am of Christ.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ku báti nfeè' múcaèr, tá ñwáè ce e be vúè naè, vúê. E be caèasi nfeè' ka'.	"In a very little while, he who comes will come, and will not wait.
Hebrews	Hibruès	10	38	Yaè ñwáè ce e yu yáánïì a máâ bsii njobeè' e byemi neè máè, be luèñ. E ka' kúti njïìnjïì baná m be yu' rboèñ neè ye ka'.”	But the righteous will live by faith. If he shrinks back, my soul has no pleasure in him."
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	"If anyone has ears to hear, let him hear!"""
Nyúè túr ñger aè rghoèni weèe goèr seê, tá weèe ke' buu yuu mo' aè nfeè' moè' ka', tá weèe bo loèr buu anaè geèe mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ aègho.	And God is able to make all grace abound to you, that you, always having all sufficiency in everything, may abound to every good work.
Mmir ŋkʉʉ a mmir ŋkɛŋ.	The eyes of a chief are eyes that see everything.
Jisòs à m bèesi mdip mi kʉtì mrùʼ.	Jesus changed water into wine.
AÈ ka' ba neètú', Pol aè yá yuu mo' aèmboè rlo wa'a. E m yá aèmboè ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè aè táá, a ce bu' mmbo neè ye enáê, “Vúè aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè, ja' weèr.”	"A vision appeared to Paul in the night. There was a man of Macedonia standing, begging him, and saying, ""Come over into Macedonia and help us."""
A mbuèu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “E m ko' mbekïì a gee beèe ce e m so a du a yeâ mbuèu, a fa mfa neè beèe foñ.”	"Therefore he says, ""When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men."""
Weèr aè m ye yuu mo' a buu efa rlaè' ka'. Weèr aè m ce faè' ce lïì'mi neètú' ba neèmootïì faè dïì' weèr bo ba ntáèr neè ñwáè moè' ka'.	neither did we eat bread from anyone's hand without paying for it, but in labor and travail worked night and day, that we might not burden any of you;
Banɛ e ce soʼniŋgòŋ.	He divided the corn and gave the greater part to his child and gave the lesser part to my child.
Ñwáè ce aède' e so ñgoèñ yu nda? Ku ba ñwáè ce e byemi ená Jisoès yu Muu Nyúè.	Who is he who overcomes the world, but he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
Weèr aè ka' yu', a yá ená yi yu boèñboñ neè weèr aè rce beèe, tuu tá a vú yá weèe. Woweèe a be vúè a Baènabaès ba Pol ce yu bkar wer seê,	it seemed good to us, having come to one accord, to choose out men and send them to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
Wèr à yɛ kuʼ bèe.	We have seen many people.
A ka' naèti duè, a seèesïî, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce geèe yuu mo' ce aède' a ba yú ye káè fa ye aè shañ ka'.”	"When they had withdrawn, they spoke one to another, saying, ""This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds."""
Woweèe a lor ye a ce duè aègho, a ka' baè' aè nduunjïì, a tarte a ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Saimúèn ce aè rla' Saèireên, ce e m ce vúè efa mñkúè. A m koo ye a fa kïìntaa neè ye ená e byá', ce jár mbenjïì Jisoès.	When they led him away, they grabbed one Simon of Cyrene, coming from the country, and laid on him the cross, to carry it after Jesus.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Yuu ce wáè bipshi na, aè ku kwa'shi ba wáè káè aè suñ beèe mo' a suñ wáè a kuu máè?”	"Jesus answered him, ""Do you say this by yourself, or did others tell you about me?"""
Waè' yi yu ená yuu ce yi m ba boèñboñ yi m vúè ba neè rkwe neè máè a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Yu ba buu bbebep ce vi m loèr mncir ce vi m ba bboèñboñ, a vú ba neè rkwe neè máè. Cena yi m ba wa'a, tá beèe a bo rïìñ yuu bbebep. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' yuu ce Nyúè aè laèa, yuu bebep yi bep ghup neè mini- ñwáè.	Did then that which is good become death to me? May it never be! But sin, that it might be shown to be sin, by working death to me through that which is good; that through the commandment sin might become exceeding sinful.
Ñwáè ka' ba ce a m geèe ye búè tá Nyúè ka' ká' ye, ñgaèñ fa keèr roèo nduunjïì mo' ená a gee ye e kúti mbáè'-nsúèr ka'. Ñwáè aè m ka' ba ba mbáè'-nsúèr tá Nyúè ka' ká' ye, e fa geèe búè ka'.	Was anyone called having been circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised. Has anyone been called in uncircumcision? Let him not be circumcised.
Buu ca vi táá ba aètu buu ce vi yu seè'ni na. Yi duèñshi seèe ená mfa ba btañshïì ce a m ce geèe neè Nyúè naè vi túr ñger aè rgeèe ñwáè tá e riñ ená e yu nrara aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	which is a symbol of the present age, where gifts and sacrifices are offered that are incapable, concerning the conscience, of making the worshipper perfect;
Pol aè ka' ce laèa buu ca aè njáâá wa'a, Fástoès aè waa, a laa enáê, “Poêl, tu yi ce kar wáè embo! Ku' yo ñwaè' ce wáè yá'ni anaè yi geèe wáè ce baa.”	"As he thus made his defense, Festus said with a loud voice, ""Paul, you are crazy! Your great learning is driving you insane!"""
Yuu ce aède' ñwáè gee yi yu ená ká? Yi yu ená ñwáè loo neè Nyúè aè li ce e m be yá'ni ka', ker loo aè li ce e rïìñ, ñwáè yop neè Nyúè aè li ce e m be yá'ni ka', ker yop neè ye aè li ce e rïìñ.	What is it then? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also.
Woweèe a koo mbaèa, a gee aèmboè a m laèa neè woweèe. Jus a ku bii ce suñ nsuñ ca aè njáâá wa'a caar ba' ntïìni na.	So they took the money and did as they were told. This saying was spread abroad among the Jews, and continues until this day.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Mbañruèñwáè caê, ñwáè ce e fa máè ñger ená m sa', káè ená m gap buu neè weèe aè fa nda?”	"But he said to him, ""Man, who made me a judge or an arbitrator over you?"""
E cuè'ni máè mgúr ca aè nyoèr wa'a, a ce kupshi yaè nyor, tá a ka' tuñ máè.	For in pouring this ointment on my body, she did it to prepare me for burial.
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ ce gèe ŋgěe bòŋboŋ à toʼ banɛ ŋkʉʉ be lò bùʼ ye.	If a person behaves well in the village, the chief will give him a title.
Kraâis aè m geèe yuu bebep ka', geewa'a, Nyúè aè m geèe e ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e m geèe lá yuu bebep wa'a, tá seèe bo ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè aèmboè Nyúè yu, njo' ye.	For him who knew no sin he made to be sin on our behalf; so that in him we might become the righteousness of God.
Mmii mi yû?	When you were eating beans Nfor was not there.
“Weèr aè duè a yá aèmboè a li' shañ boèñboñ seê, ñgaâa ncir a táá njepmbeè a ce keè'ni ñgaâa shañ. Weèr aè ka' múè' shañ, a yá ñwáè mbo ka'.”	We found the prison shut and locked, and the guards standing before the doors, but when we opened them, we found no one inside!
Nyúè ce e ke fa beèe cumúnyañ, ba weèe woweèe wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Mboè weèe aè be be' mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Luèr ce ñgaâa mboo mndap a m maè', aè m kúti ba luèr rbuu ndap’ a? ‘Ca aè m geèe Tata Nyúè, aè ba yuu báèá neè seèe.’	"Jesus said to them, ""Did you never read in the Scriptures, 'The stone which the builders rejected, the same was made the head of the corner. This was from the Lord. It is marvelous in our eyes?'"
AÈde' beèe ce a ce geèe ba buu ce ñwáè koèñ, a gee yuu ce nyor boñ Nyúè ka'.	Those who are in the flesh can't please God.
A ka' maè', ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa rdip anaè aè beeñgeèr aè bláá. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa buu bteèe enjep roè vi kweñgeèr wááwá. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa bkeñ enjep roè vi bep wááwá.	and one third of the living creatures which were in the sea died. One third of the ships were destroyed.
E lɛɛsi ye nè sàʼ.	He has wounded her with a cutlass.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' buu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa anaè vi m loè ese ñwáè ka'. Yú' Rara yi m niñ njep ntee beèe Nyúè a gee woweèe a fe'shïì blaèa ce Nyúè aè m suñ woweèe.	For no prophecy ever came by the will of man: but holy men of God spoke, being moved by the Holy Spirit.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Poêl, ce m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e m geèe ená m ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisoès. Weèr Timotïì ce e yu nfúr yïìseèe ce sañ ñwaè' ca neè cor Nyúè ce e yu aè rla' Koreèn, ker ba neè beèe Nyúè wááwá ce a yu aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè wááwá.	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus through the will of God, and Timothy our brother, to the assembly of God which is at Corinth, with all the saints who are in the whole of Achaia:
Ŋgàʼ à m yuʼ nsuŋ anà a vʉ a be mɛ̀ foŋ.	Ngah heard the news and also consulted me.
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' embenjïì, e duñshïì yïì nyor neè beèe a mmbaa ce a m ce duè aè rla' mo', a yááti aè mmïìr aè njáâá jáá.	After these things he was revealed in another form to two of them, as they walked, on their way into the country.
Woweèe a natïì, a du cárcár seê, a du a yá Máèári ba Josáèf, a yá muu aèmboè e noèñ njep rghii.	They came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the baby was lying in the feeding trough.
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na ce Jisos Kraâis ce e geèe seèe aè luêñ, aè vúè na, buu ca aè yáátïì aèwañ. Jisos Kraâis ca aè m so rkwe a vú neè ryoèñ ce aètaè li ke mi ka'. Seèe yi buu ca njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce a ce feè'shi.	but has now been revealed by the appearing of our Savior, Christ Jesus, who abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Good News.
Ñwáè ce e m kwe na aè natïì mbekïì, a ká' a ce laèa. Jisoès aè koo ye a fa neè yïì maê.	He who was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
Beèe magoèr a be vúè a máâ rlii ce laèa enáê, ‘A máè Kraâis anaè’, bo' beèe magoèr tá a da'.	For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am the Christ,' and will lead many astray.
Weèr ce laèa wa'a, njobeè' weèr aè yu' ená beèe moè' efa weèe a yu bbor. Woweèe a koèñ aè rfaè' ka' a ce kar a ce jepsi ba ntaè'teè beèe moè'.	For we hear of some who walk among you in rebellion, who don't work at all, but are busybodies.
M ̀ kaʼ bipshi nè wɛ̀ banɛ à be bèesi.	If I ask you, therefore you will answer.
Dávïìd ye ye aè m laèa enáê, “Geèe tá yuu ce woweèe a ce yu' rboèñ aègho naè, yi kúti ba taa ce yi be koo woweèe. Geèe tá woweèe a tañte, keèr kote aè yuu anaè, yá ñgá' njo' yap yuu ce a geèe anaè.	"David says, ""Let their table be made a snare, and a trap, a stumbling block, and a retribution to them."
Buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe anaè vi m túr bbaèp ntuunfu ntuunfu, mmir mi ba aègho aèñgoo seê. Mmo' mi m ba mbenduè bbaèp, mmo' mi ba nje múè bbaèp. Vi m ce yoèp yáá a ce buumi aè nfeè' moè' ka', káè neètú' áè, káè neèmootïì áè. Vi m ce yoèp enáê, “Nyúè yu nrara, Nyúè yu nrara, Nyúè yu nrara, ñger wááwá yi yu mbaè mmbo Tata Nyúè. E m ba, a ba aègho seè'ni na, aè ku ba ye ce e be vúè.”	"The four living creatures, each one of them having six wings, are full of eyes around and within. They have no rest day and night, saying, ""Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God, the Almighty, who was and who is and who is to come!"""
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Fa neè woweèe yuu tá a ye.” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Baná weèr lor baèa mbaâa bbaa, du yuu bráâd aègho neè woweèe a?”	"But he answered them, ""You give them something to eat."" They asked him, ""Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread, and give them something to eat?"""
Zhi yu àtɛ̀r enɛ mbʉ maʼ mmbùu kaʼ.	It is not possible for a goat to lay eggs.
Wɛwɛ̀ be fʉʉ du yɛ nè mo mmir.	You shall go and see it yourself.
E m laèa enáê, “Rbuu ba nshe a ka' ba ce tarte, m buu efa rghoèni wáè keèr geèe tá yoè ñgúè yaa ka'.”	"saying, ""Surely blessing I will bless you, and multiplying I will multiply you."""
E ka' bi, baná e be kep njobeè' nfeè' rkep aè gháá.”	"But when the fruit is ripe, immediately he puts forth the sickle, because the harvest has come."""
Mɛ̀ yɛ àmbò Tàta ce lùŋge nè ma bǎa kwâa.	I have seen Tata struggling with a big bag of corn.
Yá neè yuu ce Nyúè aè m geèe neè vi bcïìndap mo' ce a m geèe buu bbebep naè. Nyúè aè m buu efa rfa woweèe ñgá' ka'. E m maè' woweèe njep mor. Woweèe a noèñ njep ma beè'teè ce yi coomi neè bshañ aè mkoo. Njo yi ce sii mbïûñ mbïûñ. Woweèe a be cu njo duè baè' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè be sa' ñgoèñ.	For if God didn't spare angels when they sinned, but cast them down to Tartarus, and committed them to pits of darkness, to be reserved for judgment;
Mbèŋ à gwè ntìni sê.	The rain has fallen today heavily.
AÈmboè aè be laèa neè ye ba enáê, ‘Fáèr máè byee, yar cáâ' rfaè' caasi byee neè máè tá m ye no yuu, máâ mïìsi wáá, wá wáè ka' ye yuu, ker no yuu’ a?	and will not rather tell him, 'Prepare my supper, clothe yourself properly, and serve me, while I eat and drink. Afterward you shall eat and drink'?
Ñwáè ka' ce loo neè Nyúè aè njáèá li anaè baná ñgaèñ ku ce loo ba enjep ntee, a ke' riñ yuu ce e ce loo ka'.	For if I pray in another language, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.
Máè koèñ máná buu moè' ba ce vi be fa weèe ñgá' ka'. Ñwáè ce e cu ñkúè e ke kwaè'shi aèmboè buu ce Tata Jisoès aè koèñ ená e gee tá nyor boñ ye.	But I desire to have you to be free from cares. He who is unmarried is concerned for the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord;
Wáè maè'shi ntaañguu nje rlïìr nje wáè, a ce fyá' ba ñkúè' ce ce yi yu nfúroè nje rlïìr njoká?	Why do you see the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye, but don't consider the beam that is in your own eye?
E ká' beèe ce a m ba aèfo, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yu'shi neè boèñboñ.	"He summoned the multitude, and said to them, ""Hear, and understand."
E beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Wee weèe aè be riñ buu foñ ka' a? Mboè weèe yi weená aède' yuu ce yi ke niñ njep ñwáè yi gee ñwáè e bep aè bsii Nyúè ka' ka' a?	"He said to them, ""Are you thus without understanding also? Don't you perceive that whatever goes into the man from outside can't defile him,"
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân a ka' naèti ce duè, Jisoès aè ká' a ce suñ ku' kúr beèe ca buu kuu Joân. E m laèa enáê, “Weèe aè m fúú a du aè ntee rïìñ ba aè ryá ká? Weèe aè m duè aè ryá aèmboè fu' yi ce cïì' ñke' a?	"As these went their way, Jesus began to say to the multitudes concerning John, ""What did you go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken by the wind?"
AÈmboè seèe aè rïìñ seená Nyúè e ke kupse mi mkaè'ni ka' naè, aède' viseèe mntee vi ker bu' ka'. Baná seèe aè tii ndaèñ a niñ mbe dïû' rara embe Ndaèp Nyúè.	This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, a hope both sure and steadfast and entering into that which is within the veil;
Baná weèe lor nfeè', njobeè' máè suñ weèe buu ca tá nfeè' ka' gháá.	"But you watch. ""Behold, I have told you all things beforehand."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná yi be ba aè njáâá ká neè ñwáè ce e nyúè' muu Nyúè, a loèr bláá ce a m ye leè' aègho aè ba bláá ce vi geèe ye e ba nrara naè aè yuu cicïì, a ker cáp Yú' Nyúè ce yi ke vúè neè bghoènïì naè?	How much worse punishment, do you think, will he be judged worthy of, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the covenant with which he was sanctified an unholy thing, and has insulted the Spirit of grace?
E ke geèe wa'a njobeè' cor yu yïì nyor. Seèe ce seèe yu ñgaâa coêr, seèe yu mñgúè' mo' efa yïì nyor.)	because we are members of his body, of his flesh and bones.
Máè yá ya máná e ka' cu neè yi tu, e yu' rboèñ seê. Máè byemi máná yuu máè laèa na, yi vúè ba ese Yú' Nyúè.	But she is happier if she stays as she is, in my judgment, and I think that I also have God's Spirit.
E be dù kaʼ.	She will not go.
Sò à mʉ kàʼni enɛ sò be tarte à cii Ntaalaʼ laŋ.	We promised that we were going to meet on Ntala, didnʼt we?
Mbʉ e ke luuti ce war ker ce cɛ̀ni gòr.	When a goat is in labour it cries and urinates much.
Buu ca vi ce koni wa'a, tá a lo yá aèmboè Muu Ñwáè ce vúè mbe múè mmbaè' neè ñger-ñwáè ba neè foèo-ñwáè.	Then they will see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ lip wɛ̀ à fa kʉʉsi zhii kaʼ.	If a person beats you, don’t back it.
Weèe aè be riñ buu ka' a? Mboè weèe ce kuushi bráâd ta ce a m nyañ beèe ncúèkïì ta aègho ker ba mñkaèa ce weèe aè m baashi bbábá' aègho naè ka' a?	Don't you yet perceive, neither remember the five loaves for the five thousand, and how many baskets you took up?
Yi ba ba wa'a, yi ba ba ená beèe ce a m byemi neè Jisos Kraâis foñ, a kweñger naè a bú aè cicïì.	Then they also who are fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
Túè' aè ka' ce raa, Jisoès aè táá aèwaâa roè. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ke' riñ ená a Jisoès ka'.	But when day had already come, Jesus stood on the beach, yet the disciples didn't know that it was Jesus.
Máè rïìñ máná woweèe a m ku fa ba aèmboè aède' woweèe a m ba fa ka', woweèe a m fa a caa embo. AÈ m laèa ba ñwáè neè woweèe ená woweèe a fa wa' ka', aè m ku kwa'shi ba woweèe a fa wa'a.	For according to their power, I testify, yes and beyond their power, they gave of their own accord,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Mboè máè ba suñ wáè ená aè be yá ñger Nyúè ce wáè ka' byemi a?”	"Jesus said to her, ""Didn't I tell you that if you believed, you would see God's glory?"""
Seèe aè ka' laa seená ñger anaè yi m loè ese ñwáè, baná beèe wááwá a be túúshi seèe neè bluèr, njobeè' woweèe a byemi ená Joân aè m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyú.”	"But if we say, 'From men,' all the people will stone us, for they are persuaded that John was a prophet."""
E du a koo ye aè boè, a naa mbekïì, mbáp caè aè bornïì, e ká' a ce fáèr byee neè woweèe.	He came and took her by the hand, and raised her up. The fever left her, and she served them.
Baná Muu Nyúè aè ka' gee weèe luêñ, baná weèe aè luèñ neè mini-ñwáè ghup.	If therefore the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed.
Ndeèe beèe ca aè boñ a caa ndeèe beèe embe ndaèp rloo ce aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè, njobeè' woweèe a m koèñ aè ryu'shi blaâa Nyúè seê, a ce beè' Ñwaâ' Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá tá a bo yá ená yuu ce Pol aè m ce laèa yi m ba mini lá.	Now these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness of the mind, examining the Scriptures daily to see whether these things were so.
Beèe ce a ce geèe yuu ce e laèa, a ce cu njep ye, ye ye ce cu njep woweèe. Yuu ce yi geèe seèe aè yi ená e cu seèe woweèe yu Yú' ce e fa neè seèe.	He who keeps his commandments remains in him, and he in him. By this we know that he remains in us, by the Spirit which he gave us.
Muu wòo ca tèetu sê.	This (your) child of yours is very obstinate.
Laèa neè neè AÈkiboès ená e ce gee rfaè' ce Nyúè aè fa neè ye ená e gee naè.	"Tell Archippus, ""Take heed to the ministry which you have received in the Lord, that you fulfill it."""
“A m yu' njeèndoñ ñwáè aè rla' Ramaè, ñgaèñ aè ce war a ce koosimnse magoèr seê, Racáèl aè ce war njo' boo vi, a kani ená e be cip ka' njobeè' boo vi a m kweñger wááwá.”	A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, weeping and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children; she wouldn't be comforted, because they are no more.
Yi yu ená weèr be vúè loèr ba ñger ka' suñ weèe yuu ce weèe byemi ka', njobeè' weèe aè táá tatap njep le rbyemïì. Ler rfaè' li yu ba ená weèr ja' weèe tá weèe bo yu' rboèñ.	Not that we have lordship over your faith, but are fellow workers with you for your joy. For you stand firm in faith.
tuusi Kraâis ce a láè neè weèe. Jisoès ca yu Kraâis anaè.	and that he may send Christ Jesus, who was ordained for you before,
Sataèn aè lor ye a du aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ce yu rla' rrara, a ko' neè ye a tár mbe tu Nyúè ce yi m saèp mbekïì seê, a laa neè ye enáê,	Then the devil took him into the holy city. He set him on the pinnacle of the temple,
Pitaè ba Joân a ke' ye mbe mmïìr. Pitaè aè laa enáê, “Keè' weèr!”	"Peter, fastening his eyes on him, with John, said, ""Look at us."""
Woweèe wááwá a ce yoèp mbekïì a ce laèa enáê, “Rluèñ li loè ese Nyúè ce e cu mbe kaèbaèraè', ker ba ese Muu Njeèe.”	"They cried with a loud voice, saying, ""Salvation be to our God, who sits on the throne, and to the Lamb!"""
Wap bbyèŋge a ke fàʼ sê.	Their wives work very hard.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “AÈde' seèe ker ce roèo beèe mo' ená a vú táá njïìnsa' aè njáâá ká? To seèe aè yu' yuu ce e laèa neè yi cuèu.”	"They said, ""Why do we need any more witness? For we ourselves have heard from his own mouth!"""
Saèkaèriyaè aè m cu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè anaè teèteè seê. Beèe ce a m cu ce keè' ye naè a ce tarni ená aè koni ba ká lá.	The people were waiting for Zacharias, and they marveled that he delayed in the temple.
A mbuèu ce wer ke laèa neè bcor mo', ce naèa tu neè weèe njobeè' beèe a ke nyúè' weèe, ker fa weèe ñgá', weèe ku táá tatap, byemi ba neè Nyúè.	so that we ourselves boast about you in the assemblies of God for your patience and faith in all your persecutions and in the afflictions which you endure.
Pitaè aè kuushïì yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa neè ye enáê, “Tá nduñgúp ka' toñ, aè be kani ñkaèraè' taar ená aè rïìñ máè ka'.” E ka' kuushi wa'a, a fúú njep mbeè, a bú' rwar.	"Peter remembered the word which Jesus had said to him, ""Before the rooster crows, you will deny me three times."" He went out and wept bitterly."
Njeèndoñ aè laa embe buèu enáê, “A wáè muu waè ce m koèñ seê. M ce yu' rboèñ neè wáè seê.”	"A voice came out of the sky, ""You are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."""
Nyúè ce koèñ ená weèe gee boèñboñ wa'a tá blúr ce a máñni buu naè a bo yá, baate yap cuèu.	For this is the will of God, that by well-doing you should put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:
Waè' seèe be laèa seená yi m loè ba ese beèe a?” Woweèe a m wáp beèe njobeè' ñwáè nsïìp aè m byemi ená Joân aè m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ghup.	"If we should say, 'From men'""--they feared the people, for all held John to really be a prophet."
Blaâa Nyúè vi m duè kuèntombïì, beèe magoèr aè yu' a byemi.	But the word of God grew and multiplied.
E be bɛɛ nduunjì nè soo.	He will slant the (sides of the) road with a hoe.
“Ñwáè ryá'nïì, Musïìs aè m sañ ncir neè seèe ená ñwáè aè ka' lor ñgwa, a ye a bi boo ka', ñgaèñ kwe, baná nfúr yïì be laasi ye tá a ye a bi boo neè nfúr yïì ce e kwe naè.	"Teacher, Moses wrote to us, 'If a man's brother dies, and leaves a wife behind him, and leaves no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up offspring for his brother.'
Mark	Maêk	12	20	Bfúr mo' a m ba beèe nsaèambaê, ñwáâ nlee aè lor ñgwa, a bi boo a ye ka', a kwe.	There were seven brothers. The first took a wife, and dying left no offspring.
Mark	Maêk	12	21	Ñwáè embe yeâ njïì aè laasïì ye, a ke' bi muu a ye ka', a kwe. Ñwáè embe njïì ñwáè embe yeâ njïì aè ku gee wa'a foñ.	The second took her, and died, leaving no children behind him. The third likewise;
Mark	Maêk	12	22	Woweèe beèe nsaèamba anaè wááwá a m bi muu a njeñwáè ca ka'. AÈ ka' ba aèlúèsimbuèu njeñwáè ca aè kwe foñ.	and the seven took her and left no children. Last of all the woman also died.
Mark	Maêk	12	23	Baná be keè ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a fúú efa rkwe, tá njeñwáè ca ba ñgwa nda, aèmboè yi yu ená bfúr beèe nsaèamba ca wááwá aè m ba bduu vi naè?”	In the resurrection, when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as a wife."
Weèr aè du a yá ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès aèfo a cu weèr woweèe aè mnoèñ saèambaê. Woweèe a m laèa neè Pol aè ñger Yú' Rara ená e fa duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ka'.	Having found disciples, we stayed there seven days. These said to Paul through the Spirit, that he should not go up to Jerusalem.
Beèe Saduèsi ce a ce kani ená aède' ñwáè kwe ker fúú efa rkwe ka' naè, a vú a yá ye nyúè anaè, a bipshi neè ye enáê,	On that day Sadducees (those who say that there is no resurrection) came to him. They asked him,
Geewa'a, woweèe a m koni nduunjïì ka' njobeè' beèe wááwá a m ku ce yu' ba yuu ce e m ce laèa.	They couldn't find what they might do, for all the people hung on to every word that he said.
Ca yi ka' ba wa'a, yuu ce Jáèrïìmiyaè, ñwáè ncep ntuu aè m laèa naè yi ghááteè njo. E m laèa enáê, “Woweèe a m loèr mbaèa mntaar ce aè m ba mbaèa ce beèe Isráèl a m byemi ená a be laè' yi tu aègho,	"Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying, ""They took the thirty pieces of silver, the price of him upon whom a price had been set, whom some of the children of Israel priced,"
E m vúè tá e bo suñ beèe aèmboè rraa anaè tá beèe a bo byemi njobeè' e suñ woweèe.	The same came as a witness, that he might testify about the light, that all might believe through him.
Ñka' mbyeè buu yi m ba faèdïì' ce a m taa Jisoès mbe kïìntaa anaè. Rsheâ rfi li m ba mbo ce a m be tuñ ñwáè njo ka'.	Now in the place where he was crucified there was a garden. In the garden was a new tomb in which no man had ever yet been laid.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Ya kúú yu yïì enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Ya kúú aè ba ba yïì enjep ñgoèñ na, yaè beèe a ba beèe yaè njïì, reè bkoèr faè dïì' a fa máè mbaè mmbo Jus ka'. Yi yu ená ya kúú yi loè ba enjep ñgoèñ na ka'.”	"Jesus answered, ""My Kingdom is not of this world. If my Kingdom were of this world, then my servants would fight, that I wouldn't be delivered to the Jews. But now my Kingdom is not from here."""
Cena yi ce duèñshi ená woweèe ker ba Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yiseèe tu, a yu aèbee ka'. Ku ba ba beèe ce a yu aèbee a Jisos Kraâis weèe, ce a yu aèbee aè nyor moè'sir, a koni byee, a ce kuè' aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ.	and not holding firmly to the Head, from whom all the body, being supplied and knit together through the joints and ligaments, grows with God's growth.
Waè' weèe túr buu wááwá a? Waè' weèe yu ñgaâa mbaèa a? Weèr yu yer yu bkúú ka', weèe aè lor wee btu aèmboè bkúú. M ce koèñ máná weèe aè ba ba bkúú ghup tá seèe bo sa' bsïìp?	You are already filled. You have already become rich. You have come to reign without us. Yes, and I wish that you did reign, that we also might reign with you.
Weèe fa ba aè njáâá wa' ka'. Yi yu ba ená ñwáâ ñgoèr se efa weâe mú ba aèmboè muu ñká'. Ñwáè ce e yu tu neè beèe ba aèmboè ñwáè rfaè'.	But not so with you. But one who is the greater among you, let him become as the younger, and one who is governing, as one who serves.
Zhìi ncòo cɛ̀ʼ ca bòŋ sê.	The colour of this her dress is very nice.
M rïìñ mbuèu ce m ce geèe buu ce m ce geèe na ka', m ce geèe ba buu ce ya ntee yi ce koèñ aè rgeèe ka'. M ce geèe ba buu ce máè baèa.	For I don't know what I am doing. For I don't practice what I desire to do; but what I hate, that I do.
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená weêe mnyor yu ndap Yú' Rara a? Yú' Rara anaè yi vúè ese Nyúè a ce cu njep weèe. Mnyor ce weèe túr yu weêe mnyor ka'.	Or don't you know that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit which is in you, which you have from God? You are not your own,
Woweèe a ka' ye byee yu' boèñboñ, a fúshi msañ ce mi m ba mbe keñ a ma' njep roè tá keñ bo fáp.	When they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
Tá Nyúè fa cumúnyañ, ker koosimnse neè beèe ce a ce cu aèmboè beâe bfi, a ba beèe Isráèl mini ce a yu beèe Nyúè.	As many as walk by this rule, peace and mercy be on them, and on God's Israel.
Buu ca vi m ba aèmboè rleèñshi ce li m ce duèñshi beèe yuu ce yi be keè ba. Yuu ce buu ca vi m ce duèñshi anaè aè ba Jisos Kraêis.	which are a shadow of the things to come; but the body is Christ's.
Baná weèe tami nyor, ke'ni wee btu, ce ke' ba rboâñntee Nyúè ce weèe be koni aè nfeè' ce Jisos Kraâis aè vúè.	Therefore, prepare your minds for action, be sober and set your hope fully on the grace that will be brought to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ--
E suñ woweèe buu magoèr aè mñgaèa. E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m duè aè rbyeè buu,	"He spoke to them many things in parables, saying, ""Behold, a farmer went out to sow."
Saimún Pitaè a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, baná aè fa kuè suè'si ba ma mkuèu caè'caè' ka', suè'si ma mmbo ba ya tu foñ.”	"Simon Peter said to him, ""Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and my head!"""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Pitaè aè laa enáê, “AÈnaèniyaès, Sataèn aè ruusi yo ntee, a gee wáè nya' mnde' neè Yú' Nyúè, a gapni mbaèa nsuu ce wáè mú fyeni njoká?	"But Peter said, ""Ananias, why has Satan filled your heart to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back part of the price of the land?"
a ka' yá mo' ce e luèu ntaa seê, a du a fyeni yïì buu wááwá a yuu aègho.	who having found one pearl of great price, he went and sold all that he had, and bought it.
Ñwáè ca ce faè' ba neè Nyúè tá e bo jaè' wáè. Wáè ka' gee yuu bebep, aè wáp ye, njobeè' ñger ce a fa ye anaè yi yu aè cicïì ka'. Nyúè aè fa ye ñger aè rkúsi mcucu' neè beèe ce a ce geèe buu bbebep.	for he is a servant of God to you for good. But if you do that which is evil, be afraid, for he doesn't bear the sword in vain; for he is a servant of God, an avenger for wrath to him who does evil.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Musïìs aè m laèa neè weèe ená ká?”	"He answered, ""What did Moses command you?"""
Mɛ̀ dù bkèʼsè.	I went expecting drinks or food.
Be keèe ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a fúú efa rkwe tá beèe a ker loèr bbyeèñge, káè guèusi boo ka'. Beèe a be keèe ba aèmboè bcïìndap Nyúè embe buèu.	For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are like God's angels in heaven.
Jáms ba Pitaè ba Joân ce a m ba aèmboè btu btatap embe coêr, a ka' yá ená Nyúè aè fa máè njáèá rfaè' ca ghup, weèr woweèe ba Baènabaès aè fanïì mmbo aè rduèñshi ená weèr ce faè' aèbee. Weèr woweèe aè m byemi aèbee ená weèr Baènabaès du fe'shi yer ba neè beèe enje jáá, tá woweèe a fe'shi yap ba neè Juês.	and when they perceived the grace that was given to me, James and Cephas and John, they who were reputed to be pillars, gave to me and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that we should go to the Gentiles, and they to the circumcision.
Ñwáè Farïìsi anaè aè ka' yá ená Jisoès aè ba su'si mmbo a ka' ká' a ce yeñger ka', e bááñgeèr seê.	When the Pharisee saw it, he marveled that he had not first washed himself before dinner.
M ce laèa ená aè gee buu ce máè laèa na, ke' co' mo' embo ka'. Geèe vi yáánïì caar du ba' aè nfeè' ce Tata Jisos Kraâis be vúè.	that you keep the commandment without spot, blameless, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ;
Kaʼ ba enɛ wɛ̀ yɛ ye kaʼ banɛ wèe ye à bàase à nduunjì.	If you have not see him, therefore you have bypassed each other on the way.
Ncɛ̀p à càa, mɛ̀ du àmbùu mo.	A juju passed and I followed it.
Tá weèr ka' baè' aè rla' Ruêm, bfúr ce aè rla' anaè a m banïì yu' ená weèr yu aè nduunjïì. Woweèe a vú caar a ba' aè ntaa yïû aè rla' AÈpiyoè, beèe mo' a ba' faèdïì' bhoètál vi m ba vi btaar, tá a bo koni weèr. Pol aè ka' yá woweèe, a yoñshi Nyúè, ñger yi vú ye nje nyoèr.	From there the brothers, when they heard of us, came to meet us as far as The Market of Appius and The Three Taverns. When Paul saw them, he thanked God, and took courage.
Weèe fa koèñ ñgoèñ ka'. Weèe fa koèñ buu enjep ñgoèñ ka'. Ñwáè ka' koñ ñgoèñ aètaè ñgaèñ koñ Taèr ka',	Don't love the world, neither the things that are in the world. If anyone loves the world, the Father's love isn't in him.
Weèr aè m ba mbe keñ anaè wááwá beèe mjeâe mbaa neè ncoèp-ntuunfu-aè- mnsaèambaê.	In all, we were two hundred seventy-six souls on the ship.
E coo wɛ̀ a?	Good afternoon or evening! coo3 [tʃóː] v.
M ce loo máná Tata Jisoès túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na, Nyúè aè geèe beèe a riñ njáèá njïì ce aède' ñwáè ba yáánïì a yeâ bsii. Njïì anaè túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè mncir ka'. Ñwaè' mncir Nyúè ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa aèmboè njïì anaè.	But now apart from the law, a righteousness of God has been revealed, being testified by the law and the prophets;
AÈ rloo wa'a yu yuu boèñboñ, aè ba yuu ce Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè' e ke yu' rboèñ aègho.	For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior;
Weèe aè yu' aèmboè e bepsi rlii Nyúè. Weèe aè laèa wee ká?” Beèe wááwá a laa ená a yú ye.	"You have heard the blasphemy! What do you think?"" They all condemned him to be worthy of death."
AÈmboè a ke baashi ñke' too neè mor naè, yi be keèe ba wa'a aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì.	As therefore the darnel weeds are gathered up and burned with fire; so will it be at the end of this age.
M be tɛr yàa ntaaŋguu ca mbena.	I will put this my stick here.
Nyúè be keè sa' beèe tá e kani efa rkoosimnse neè beèe ce a m buu efa rkoosimnse neè beèe mo'. Baná beèe ce a m ce koosimnse neè beèe mo' a be wáp mnsa' anaè ka'.	For judgment is without mercy to him who has shown no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
Seèe ku'si Nyúè ce e ku ba moè'sir caè'caè', moè' aè ker ba ka'. Yu ye ce e geèe seèe aè luñ njïì enjep Tata Jisos Kraêis. Tá beèe a yu'ni neè ye, ker ku'si ye. Tá e ba ñkúú ce e be sa' seèe, ká' efa rkáè' vú ba' seè'ni na, ker ba aè nfeè' wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	to God our Savior, who alone is wise, be glory and majesty, dominion and power, both now and forever. Amen.
ce beèe embe buèu ba beèe enjep nsheè wááwá a yu aègho njo' ye.	from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,
E gaèpni a yuu bebep, baná e be keèr cu li rcu enjep ñgoèñ na, ce geèe ba buu bbebep ce vi bláá vi ce luèute aè rgeèe ka'. E be cu ce geèe ba yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ.	that you no longer should live the rest of your time in the flesh for the lusts of men, but for the will of God.
Woweèe a beèesi neè ye enáê, “Beèe mo' a ce laèa ená aè yu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe, beèe mo' ená aè yu AÈlajaè, beèe mo' ená aè yu moè' efa ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè.”	"They told him, ""John the Baptizer, and others say Elijah, but others: one of the prophets."""
Weèe ce loo, ce too Nyúè ená yeè Taê. E yu ñwáè ce e ke so'ni ñgoèñ ka', ce sa' beèe ba aè buu ce woweèe a geèe, baná aèmboè weèe ce cu njep ñgoèñ na aèmboè bkïìloè na, weèe ce wáp ye.	If you call on him as Father, who without respect of persons judges according to each man's work, pass the time of your living as foreigners here in reverent fear:
Beèe mo' efa woweèe aè m ba Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Máèári ce e m ba ma yïì Jáêms ba Josáèf, ker ba ma boo vïû Sábáèdïî.	Among them were Mary Magdalene, Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
Gheèter neè cu ba rcu ce li yu yáánïì. Ñwáè fa ce fúèúshi cuèu aè buu beèe moè' ka'. Ñwáè wááwá ce fa' yuu ce yi be jaè' ye. Weèr aè m suñ weèe wáá ená weèe gee wa'a.	and that you make it your ambition to lead a quiet life, and to do your own business, and to work with your own hands, even as we instructed you;
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè beèe anaè enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená aède' Muu gee yuu neè yi tu ka'. AÈde' e gee ba yuu ce e yá Taèr aè ce geèe. Yuu ce yïì Ta e ke geèe, a yuu ce ye ye e ke geèe.	"Jesus therefore answered them, ""Most certainly, I tell you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father doing. For whatever things he does, these the Son also does likewise."
Jisoès aè ka' ba aè ñgoâñ Galeèle wa'a, a ker du aè rla' Kánaè faèdïì' ce e m beèesi mdip mi kútïì mruè' naè. Ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' aè m ba aèfo ce muu yïì aè m ce yañ aè rla' ce a m ce too ená Kaèpanuèm.	Jesus came therefore again to Cana of Galilee, where he made the water into wine. There was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
E m loèr bráêd, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a fa neè woweèe, a laa enáê, “Ca yu yaè nyor ce máè fa a weâe btuè. Ce gee neè aèmboè seèe ce geèe na tá weèe bo ce kuushi máè.”	"He took bread, and when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave to them, saying, ""This is my body which is given for you. Do this in memory of me."""
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè laèa embe dïì' rfa enáê, “Yi yu mini. Wáâ Nyúè ce aè yu yeèr taê, ñger wááwá yi yu mba wáâ mmboè. Wáè teni mnsa' aè njïû yáánïì.”	"I heard the altar saying, ""Yes, Lord God, the Almighty, true and righteous are your judgments."""
E ba aè nfeè' moè' beèe a lor weèr aè buu bcicïì, geewa'a, beèe a rïìñ weèr aè bdïì' wááwá. E ba aè nfeè' moè' a yá weèr aèmboè bgúâú beèe wa'a, geewa'a weèr ku ba bteèe. Beèe a fa weèr ñgá', a ke' yú ne weèr ka'.	as unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as punished, and not killed;
M ce duè njobeè' ñgaâa rbyemïì ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ba ñgoâñ AÈkayaè a m kwaè'shi ená woweèe a be kuèu mbaèa tá a bo jaè' ñgaâa fuèp ce a yu aè mú beèe Nyúè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	For it has been the good pleasure of Macedonia and Achaia to make a certain contribution for the poor among the saints who are at Jerusalem.
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yá, a ku fúú, a du a yá beèe ñkúú Hároèd moè', a woweèe a ká' a ce seèesi aèmboè a be koo Jisoès yú.	The Pharisees went out, and immediately conspired with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
Yi yu yi ká aèmboè beèe ncoèp-waami-aè-rrúèú ce ma ñgúè' ndap moè' ce e Siloèm aè m káèáti a yúshi naè? Waè' weèe ce kwaè'shi ená woweèe a m ba yap ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a caa beèe wááwá aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a?	Or those eighteen, on whom the tower in Siloam fell, and killed them; do you think that they were worse offenders than all the men who dwell in Jerusalem?
E laa neè ye enáê, “ÁÈno, Tataê, máè byemi máná aè yu Kraêis, Muu Nyúè ce e m ba ená e be vúè njep ñgoèñ naè.”	"She said to him, ""Yes, Lord. I have come to believe that you are the Christ, God's Son, he who comes into the world."""
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, e cu a yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, tá a bo ye byee.	Now when evening had come, he was reclining at the table with the twelve disciples.
aè rbaèñ mmir aè buu, bsaèrbuu, mbo'ni, ndeâe mbembep, ñko'ndoñ, mnsa'ni, naèanyor ba blúr.	covetings, wickedness, deceit, lustful desires, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, and foolishness.
baná rsa' rfi ce li vúè yi ba neè Yú' Rara, li caèa lïû rrúèú aè njáèá njïì ce e ce duèñshi foèo Nyúè.	won't service of the Spirit be with much more glory?
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Seèe be kuè cu seè'ni ba nfeè' múcaèr tá m kúti duè yá ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	"Then Jesus said, ""I will be with you a little while longer, then I go to him who sent me."
Hároèd ce e m ce sa' ñgoâñ Galeèleê, aè m yu' buu ce vi m ce koni na bfee vi jep ye seê, njobeè' beèe mo' a m ce laèa ená Joân aè fúú efa rkwe,	Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him; and he was very perplexed, because it was said by some that John had risen from the dead,
Woweèe a waa enáê, “AÈi', fa fúr ba ye ka'. Fúr ba Baèrabaès fa neè weèr.” Baèrabaès ca aè m ba ñkep.	"Then they all shouted again, saying, ""Not this man, but Barabbas!"" Now Barabbas was a robber."
Seèe ce maè' bïìr ca ba seèe beèe weèe ka'. Seèe ce maè' ba seèe byú' bbebep wááwá ce vi túr ñger mbekïì. Byú' bbebep ca yu byú' ce vi ce sa', a túr ñger, a tap njep ñgoèñ ce yi yu aè túè'nji na.	For our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against the powers, against the world's rulers of the darkness of this age, and against the spiritual forces of wickedness in the heavenly places.
AÈ nfeè' máè m bá'shi mtu' bráâd taê, a fa neè beèe ncúèkïì ta naè, woweèe a m ye, weèe a kwá' bbábá' aè mñkaâa bsá'?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr aè m kwáè' aè mñkaèa ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.”	"When I broke the five loaves among the five thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up?"" They told him, ""Twelve."""
Máâ cu weèr beèe ce map mkwaè'shïì mi ku bii fa woweèe ñgá', m ku ba aèmboè woweèe wa'a tá m bo so woweèe neè Jisos Kraêis. Máâ loè ku gee yaè nyor aèmboè beèe a yu, tá m bo gheèter aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá, geèe tá woweèe a luêñ.	To the weak I became as weak, that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to all men, that I may by all means save some.
Baná Sataèn ka' ce reè bkoèr a yïì nyor, ñgaèpni yi ba, baná e be táá ka', tá ba yi wa' wáá.	If Satan has risen up against himself, and is divided, he can't stand, but has an end.
Ñwáè ka' ce loo ce yoèñshi Nyúè aè njáèá li ce e m be yá'ni ka', aède' ñwáè ce e rïìñ buu Nyúè boèñboñ ka' gee eká ka' byemi aè yuu ce e laèa, laa enáê, “Yi yu wa'a”, ce aèmboè e ce yu' yuu ce ñgaèñ aè laèa ka'.	"Otherwise if you bless with the spirit, how will he who fills the place of the unlearned say the ""Amen"" at your giving of thanks, seeing he doesn't know what you say?"
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Poêl, ba Silaès ba Timotïì neè ñgaâa cor ce a yu aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè. Beèe ca yu beèe Nyúè Taèr, a ker ba beèe Jisos Kraâis foñ. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, fa weèe cumúnyañ.	Paul, Silvanus, and Timothy, to the assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ: Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' bfee enjep ñgoèñ na yu ba blúr aè bsii Nyúè. Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Nyúè e ke loèr bfee ñgaâa bfee, koo ñgaâa bfee anaè aègho.”	"For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. For it is written, ""He has taken the wise in their craftiness."""
E laa foñ neè beèe ce a m ba aèfo naè enáê, “Weâe ke yá aèmboè mmbaè' vi ko' embaè mbuèuntii weèe ku laa weená mbeèñ be gweè, mbeèñ ku gwe ghup.	"He said to the multitudes also, ""When you see a cloud rising from the west, immediately you say, 'A shower is coming,' and so it happens."
ker ba mnsa' njobeè' ñkúú enjep ñgoèñ na aè gweè mnsa'.	about judgment, because the prince of this world has been judged.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, bfúr waê, weèe yu beèe ce weèe ce cu aè túè'nji tá noèñ anaè yi bo búèú weèe aèmboè nyáèá e ke búèú ñwáè naè ka'.	But you, brothers, aren't in darkness, that the day should overtake you like a thief.
Woowèe a ker ce kòŋ à rzhe baa kaʼ.	They donʼt like to eat fufu again.
A m loèr gúâú Jisoès a kur neè bcáâ' bboèñboñ neè mcáèp anaè-ñwáè aèmboè Jus a m ce geèe.	So they took Jesus' body, and bound it in linen cloths with the spices, as the custom of the Jews is to bury.
Túè' aè ka' raa, ñgaâa teni mnsa' a tuu yap ñgaâa ntuu ená a du laa ená a fúr beèe anaè embe shañ.	"But when it was day, the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, ""Let those men go."""
Wèr be ghèter làa nè yer cùu.	We will try and say it ourselves.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè byemi ená m yu Kraâis ka' njobeè' weèe yu ya njeèe ka'.	But you don't believe, because you are not of my sheep, as I told you.
Yuu ce yi geèe weèr aè túr rtarnïì aè rbipshi yuu neè ye ka' yi yu ená weèr ka' loo ka' ká ce e koèñ ese ye, e be yu' weèr.	This is the boldness which we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he listens to us.
Satàn à m bèeŋger à nyo a boʼ Êf.	Satan transformed into a snake and deceived Eve.
Beèe mo' a mooshïì ye, a laa neè ye ená e duñshi woweèe ncoèo embe buèu.	Others, testing him, sought from him a sign from heaven.
Bfúr waê, aè m ba mbe nfeè' ce máè m vúè yá weèe tá m bo feè'shi buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe weèr aè riñ kuu Jisos Kraâis naè, máè vú a ke' ce laa ba blaèa ce beèe bo vúse ka' káè feè'shi ba neè bfee ñwáè tá weèe ka' byemi ka'.	When I came to you, brothers, I didn't come with excellence of speech or of wisdom, proclaiming to you the testimony of God.
Máè rïìñ ya ye, njobeè' máè m vúè ese ye, aè ba ye ce e m tuu máè.”	"I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me."""
Jisoès aè m laèa cena njobeè' wee mo' a m ce laèa ená yú' bebep yi yu lá njep ye.	"--because they said, ""He has an unclean spirit."""
Woweèe a ka' yá ye, a laa a waâp mú enáê, ‘A ñwáè ce e be ye bti' na. Seèe koo yú, tá vi bti' bo ba viseèe.’	"But when the farmers saw him, they reasoned among themselves, saying, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, that the inheritance may be ours.'
Luke	Luêk	20	15	Woweèe a koo ye a fúr embe múè nsuu, a yú. Baná yuu ce aède' ñwáè nsuu gee neè woweèe yu ba ká?	They threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
Luke	Luêk	20	16	E be vúè yúshi woweèe, láè nsuu anaè neè beâe jáá.” Beèe a ka' yu' ca, a laa enáê, “Yuu mo' yi fa keè koni wa' ka'.”	He will come and destroy these farmers, and will give the vineyard to others. When they heard it, they said, ""May it never be!"""
Ka' Jisoès aè m duèñshi ku' mncoèo a waâp bsii wa'a, woweèe a m byemi yap yu neè ye ka'.	But though he had done so many signs before them, yet they didn't believe in him,
A m sañ mlii beèe a mmbaa ca ená a bo co' ñwáè ce e be loèr dïì' Judaès. A ka' geèe wa'a, rlii ce li fúú entoèmbïì aè ba li Maètiyaès. Li ka' fúú, a lor ye a fa mbe múè ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ce a m ba beèe ncoèp-moè'sir-aè-rrúèú naè.	They drew lots for them, and the lot fell on Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
Máè lo a yá ma yuu mo' aèmboè yi yááti mbe buèu. AÈ m ba yuu báèá. Njeñwáè moè' aè m yááti mbo. E m maè' nyúè ce e ke sañ na aè nyoèr, a táá mbenduè ñwáá, a yar rtaa kúú ce a m geèe neè mkaèñsïì ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	A great sign was seen in heaven: a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars.
Nduunjì zhi zhiʼse.	The path is narrow.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' mntee beèe ca vi tap seê. Btuè' vi lo' woweèe, woweèe a ker kaashi map mmir, buwa'laèr woweèe a ba yá buu neè map mmir, yu' buu neè wap btuè', beèeñger, vúè aè mbeèp yaè, tá m gee woweèe a luêñ.”’	For this people's heart has grown callous. Their ears are dull of hearing. Their eyes they have closed. Lest they should see with their eyes, hear with their ears, understand with their heart, and would turn again, and I would heal them.'
AÈ m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, Jisoès aè ce yá'ni mbe ndaèp rloo moè'.	He was teaching in one of the synagogues on the Sabbath day.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba ce a m ce too ená Josáèf. E m ba ñwáâ aè rla' Jus ce a m too ená AÈrimaètiyaè. E m ba moè' efa beèe ce a m ce sa' Kansuèr, a ba ñwáâ mboèñmboñ, a ker ba ñwáâ nyáánïì.	Behold, a man named Joseph, who was a member of the council, a good and righteous man
Lòr nè ndoŋ anà-ŋwɛ̀ vʉ àgho.	Bring it together with that cup.
Ka' njáèá rkoèñnïì anaè li caèa ñger ñwáè aè rrïìñ wa'a, m ce loo máná weèe riñ li, tá buu bboèñboñ ce vi ruu njep ntee Nyúè naè vi bo ruu njep weâe mntee foñ.	and to know Christ's love which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
John a nfeesè zhìi tâ.	John is the one who resembles his father.
AÈ m ba aè mnoèñ anaè, ma kúr beèe yi ker vú a kaari, a ke' koni yuu ye ka'. Jisoès aè ká' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè woweèe enáê,	In those days, when there was a very great multitude, and they had nothing to eat, Jesus called his disciples to himself, and said to them,
Kwaa à bi banɛ sèe be kep.	The corn is ready therefore we will harvest it.
E m ker laa enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená aède' a yu'nïì neè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè fa yeâ laè' ka'.	"He said, ""Most certainly I tell you, no prophet is acceptable in his hometown."
A m sañ mbuèu ce a m taa ye mbe kïìntaa. A m sañ enáê, “Ñkúú Juês.”	"The superscription of his accusation was written over him, ""THE KING OF THE JEWS."""
M ̀ be yɛʼni wɛ̀ àmbò a ke saŋ ŋwàʼ.	I will teach you how to write.
Wɛ̀ beʼti muu tʉʉtʉ̀ŋ njokɛ?	Why have you turned the baby upside down?
Pitaè aè koo ye, a ye a lá'sïì nyor, a ká' a ce lapni ye a ce laèa enáê, “Tataê, Nyúè fáási! AÈde' njáèá yuu ca yi ke' koni neè wáè ka'.”	"Peter took him aside, and began to rebuke him, saying, ""Far be it from you, Lord! This will never be done to you."""
E ka' ce duè, Jisoès a ciisïì neè ye enáê,	He strictly warned him, and immediately sent him out,
Saimúèn ker ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ce koo nca naè, a bááñgeèr seê, aè ryá ku' njáèá nca ce woweèe a m koo.	For he was amazed, and all who were with him, at the catch of fish which they had caught;
Barse mntaʼ bbaa vʉ àgho.	Put two chairs together and bring.
Lu'shi neè aè njáèá noèñ anaè, nyáshi mbekïì neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè njobeè' wee blaè' embe buèu vi yu magoèr seê. Wap btarkú a m ku gee buu ca neè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè foñ.	Rejoice in that day, and leap for joy, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did the same thing to the prophets.
A mbuèu ce Nyúè aè maè'shi ená woweèe a gee buu bbebep aèmboè woweèe a ce koèñ aè rgeèe. Woweèe a ce geèe buu ce vi yu neè rïìtu-ñwáè neè wap mnyor, a waâp mú.	Therefore God also gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, that their bodies should be dishonored among themselves,
“Ñwáè ce e m be fa Nyúè yuu tá Nyúè bo laè' yuu ce e m fa neè ye anaè yu nda?”	Or who has first given to him, and it will be repaid to him again?
A mbuèu ce beèe magoèr ce a m yu' yuu báèá ce Jisoès aè m geèe anaè, a m vúè a yá ye.	For this cause also the multitude went and met him, because they heard that he had done this sign.
Woweèe a m ba bcuèu jáá jáèá jáá seê, a gapni. Baènabaès aè lor Joèn Maêk, a ye a niñ mbe keñ a du aè to' Saiproès.	Then the contention grew so sharp that they separated from each other. Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed away to Cyprus,
E ka' laèa wa'a, a du a joo ñkuèp gúâú ñwáè anaè, beèe ce a m byáè' ñkuèp anaè a táá, e laa enáê, “Muu nsuènsuè, m ce laèa neè wáè ená aè nati mbekïì.”	"He came near and touched the coffin, and the bearers stood still. He said, ""Young man, I tell you, arise!"""
Weèe aè m yú ye yu ñwáè ce e m múè' nduunjïû ryoèñ. Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m fúr ye efa rkwe, weèr aè yá ye neè mer mmir.	and killed the Prince of life, whom God raised from the dead, to which we are witnesses.
E yu tu neè coêr. Cor anaè aè ba yïì nyor. Ñwáè ce e m káè' cor aè m káè' ye njobeè' e m ba ñwáè entombïì aè rfúú efa rkwe neè nyor ce aède' e ker kwe ka'. Buu ca yu wa'a tá e bo ba ñwáè ce e táá kuèntombïì neè buu wááwá.	He is the head of the body, the assembly, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the preeminence.
tá wap bfee vi bo kúti woweèe mbo, tá woweèe a fúú enjep taa Sataèn ce yi m koo woweèe, a gee woweèe a ce yu'ni ba neè ye naè.	and they may recover themselves out of the devil's snare, having been taken captive by him to his will.
Jisoès aè m duèñshi ku' mncoèo mo' aè bsii ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca ka'.	Therefore Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book;
Weèe aè m ba aènjïìsaèp ese Nyúè, aè ka' ba seè'ni ce weèe yu aèbee weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe na, wee weèe aè vú aètútú njobeè' e m kwe a weâe btuè.	But now in Christ Jesus you who once were far off are made near in the blood of Christ.
Weèe fa leèse blaâa Nyúè ce vi ke fa weèe ñger njobeè' weèe yu boo vi naè ka'. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Muu waè, Nyúè aè ka' fa wáè ñgá' njo' yuu bebep ce wáè geèe, aè fa loèr aètáèr ka'. E ka' cep wáè, aè fa koosi bsáè ka'.	"and you have forgotten the exhortation which reasons with you as with children, ""My son, don't take lightly the chastening of the Lord, nor faint when you are reproved by him;"
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Weèe ce kwaè'shi weená aède' weèe ma'shïì beèe ce a vúè ñkaâ' bguèu neè njeè ce nduu-guèu ku ba aèfo a?	"He said to them, ""Can you make the friends of the bridegroom fast, while the bridegroom is with them?"
Ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka', aè ka' be wáè ená aè vú tá weèe ye ye byee, wáè ka' duê, aè ye njáèá byee wááwá ce e ka' fa wáè. Fa maè'shi tá yo ntee yi lo káè' ce fa wáè ñgá' ka'.	But if one of those who don't believe invites you to a meal, and you are inclined to go, eat whatever is set before you, asking no questions for the sake of conscience.
Baa zhi yu jàʼte.	The fufu is slimy.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa ca mïìsi, a nati a ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm entombïì neè woweèe.	Having said these things, he went on ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
Kuè táá yo ba njep buu ce a m yá'ni wáè, wáè rïîñ, a byemi ená vi yu mini naè, kuushi beèe ce a m yá'ni wáè buu anaè.	But you remain in the things which you have learned and have been assured of, knowing from whom you have learned them.
Be ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a ce laèa ená buu wááwá yu yáánïì, cumúnyañ aè ba se naè, tá ñgá' moè' lo vúè neè woweèe. Ñgá' ca be keè lá'si woweèe aèmboè aè nfeè' ce njeñwáè e ke káè' ce luuti muu naè, tá woweèe a túr njïì moè' ce aède' a cañ ka'.	"For when they are saying, ""Peace and safety,"" then sudden destruction will come on them, like birth pains on a pregnant woman; and they will in no way escape."
Jisoès aè niñ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a fyá' buu wááwá, a ka' yá ená nyúè ce coo, a nati a yïì beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú weèe, a du aè rla' Bátanïì.	Jesus entered into the temple in Jerusalem. When he had looked around at everything, it being now evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.
Lisèe rkèp rli yû?	Where is our flute?
Ñwáè aè ka' yá ñgá' ba njobeè' e yu ñwáè rbyemïì, rïìtu yi fa koo ñgaèñ ka', ñgaèñ yoñshi Nyúè ená e yu mbaèmba Kraêis.	But if one of you suffers for being a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God in this matter.
Muu ca e ke gèe ŋgěe bòŋboŋ sê.	This child behaves very well.
Gee bkuu anà ce raa kaʼ.	The side of that bed is not clean.
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' koni muu ghaèrñwáè aèmboè ca a máâ rlii, baná ñgaèñ aè koni máè. Ñwáè ce e ka' koni máè, baná ñgaèñ aè koni ñwáè ce e m tuu máè. Yi yu ba ená ñwáè ce e yu ñwáâ ñká' seê a weâe mú wááwá yu ñwáâ ñgoèr.”	"and said to them, ""Whoever receives this little child in my name receives me. Whoever receives me receives him who sent me. For whoever is least among you all, this one will be great."""
Zhisèe zhi cîr.	They have already sold their cows.
E ka' laèa wa'a, ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè sasïì bcáè' efa nyoèr, a laa enáê, “E bepsi rlii Nyúè. Mbuèu moè' ker ba neè seèe aè rlaèa ená ñwáè moè' ker laa yuu kuu ñwáè ca ka'. To weèe aè yu' aèmboè e bepsi rlii Nyúè.	"Then the high priest tore his clothing, saying, ""He has spoken blasphemy! Why do we need any more witnesses? Behold, now you have heard his blasphemy."
Ñgaâa ryá'nïì mncir mo' a m cute aèfo, a ce kwaè'shi enáê,	But there were some of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in their hearts,
A m kupshi buu embe brum bbaa ca wa'a, ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a ce duè mbe rum yïû entombïì a ce geèe rfaè' mbo neè Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá,	Now these things having been thus prepared, the priests go in continually into the first tabernacle, accomplishing the services,
Woweèe a waa, a laa enáê, “Taa ye mbe kïìntaa! Taa ye mbe kïìntaa!”	"but they shouted, saying, ""Crucify! Crucify him!"""
A ka' ce duè a ce bipshi a waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè ce e be duè biñsi luèr embe ncuèu rsheè neè seèe a nda?”	"They were saying among themselves, ""Who will roll away the stone from the door of the tomb for us?"""
M ce suñ weèe yuu mini ená beèe mo' a táá mbena ce rkwe li be joèo woweèe ka', tá woweèe a cu, caar yá kúú Nyúè.”	"But I tell you the truth: There are some of those who stand here, who will in no way taste of death, until they see the Kingdom of God."""
Woowèe a ku ce tose ba sèʼni na.	They have just suddenly arrived.
Mboè ñwáè ca yu muu kapintaè caè a? Mboè a too yïì ma ená Máèári a? Mboè bfúr vi aè ba Jáms ba Josáèf, ba Saimúèn ba Judaès a?	Isn't this the carpenter's son? Isn't his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James, Joses, Simon, and Judas?
AÈmboè woweèe a m ce yeñger anaè, e lor bráâd a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a fa neè woweèe, a laa enáê, “Koè neè. Ca yu yaè nyor.”	"As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and when he had blessed, he broke it, and gave to them, and said, ""Take, eat. This is my body."""
E ka' kúti baè' aèwaâa rla', ñgaâa mfaè' a vú a koni ye a laa neè ye ená muu yïì aè luèñ.	"As he was now going down, his servants met him and reported, saying ""Your child lives!"""
Woweèe a m fúshi ku' byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe, a ker yo' ñgaâa byañ magoèr neè mgúr, woweèe a ke'seè.	They cast out many demons, and anointed many with oil who were sick, and healed them.
Nse yi m koo weèe neè ñgaâa shañ, weèe aè ja' woweèe. Beèe a m faèpshi yeè buu, weèe aè ma'shïì, a ku ce lu'shi lu'shi njobeè' weèe aè m rïìñ ená weèe túr buu moè' ce vi boèñ a caa vïì anaè, aè ba buu ce vi be cu nfeseè.	For you both had compassion on me in my chains, and joyfully accepted the plundering of your possessions, knowing that you have for yourselves a better possession and an enduring one in the heavens.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m tuu neèñguu roè a lese aè rloèr bráêd.	The disciples came to the other side and had forgotten to take bread.
Buu ca wááwá e ba njep yeâ tïìi tá ye Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Muu Nyúè lá yïì nyor njeptii Nyúè, tá Nyúè ce e láè buu wááwá njeptii Jisos Kraâis bo túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá.	When all things have been subjected to him, then the Son will also himself be subjected to him who subjected all things to him, that God may be all in all.
Zhì tâ e ke gèe ŋgèe fòprì-fòprì sê.	His father acts very disorderly.
E fa mɛ̀ mgbaŋ mbe saabo.	He has given me a handful of salt.
E m loèr weèe ce weèe yu mmba' ce Oleèf efa rïìñ, a bar nje ce Oleèf yïû aè mñkúè, ce yi ke ba wa'a ka', baná neè mini-ñwáè, e túr ñger aè rloèr mmba' ce vïû aè mñkúè ce a m faèrshi naè, bar nje ce anaè.	For if you were cut out of that which is by nature a wild olive tree, and were grafted contrary to nature into a good olive tree, how much more will these, which are the natural branches, be grafted into their own olive tree?
Weèe aè laèa ená weèe yu ñgaâa bfee seê, a ku ce byemi yuu ce blúr a ce geèe naè neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	For you bear with the foolish gladly, being wise.
Byemi neè yuu ce máè suñ weèe ená m yu njep yaè Taê, yaè Ta aè ba njep máè naè. Weèe aè ka' tá byemi njo' blaèa ca ka', weèe aè ba byemi njobeè' mfaè' ce máè geèe na.	Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me; or else believe me for the very works' sake.
Felep aè ka' cañ duâ baè', a yu' aèmboè e ce beè' embe ñwaè' AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè. E bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Wáâ beè' wa'a, a riñ yuu ce yi ce laèa a?”	"Philip ran to him, and heard him reading Isaiah the prophet, and said, ""Do you understand what you are reading?"""
Seèe be ka' laèa seeká seè'ni? Waè' yi yu ená seèe be kuè ce geèe buu bbebep tá beèe a bo yá rboâñntee Nyúè goèr a?	What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound?
Máè tuu weèe ená weèe du kep buu ce weèe aè m byeè ka'. Beèe mo' a m byeè, weèe aè ye sá' efa rfaè' beèe anaè.”	"I sent you to reap that for which you haven't labored. Others have labored, and you have entered into their labor."""
Jisoès aè m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè nfeè' aè be gháá ka'. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, nfeè' ku ba.	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""My time has not yet come, but your time is always ready."
Yi ku ba neè seèe wa' foñ. Ka' seèe yu aèñgoo wa'a, seèe ku ba nyor moè'sir njobeè' seèe Kraâis weèe yu aèbee. Yi ka' ba ená seèe yu nyor moè'sir, baná ñgúè' nyor moè' yu neè yi tu ka'.	so we, who are many, are one body in Christ, and individually members one of another.
Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m fúr ye efa rkwe,	But God raised him from the dead,
Ndukòŋ à bir Njùʼ njep ncàʼ sê.	Njuh and Ndukong fought and Ndukong has rubbed Njuh in mud very well.
Beèe Farïìsi ba beèe Saduèsïî, a m duè aè rmoèoshi Jisoès, a laa neè ye ená e duñshi woweèe ncoèo embe buèu.	The Pharisees and Sadducees came, and testing him, asked him to show them a sign from heaven.
Nkɛ̌ɛngwe rli koo Tantoʼ.	An abscess has infected Tanto.
Yi yu foñ ená njeñwáè ka' túr nduu ce e yu ñwáè rbyemïì ka', nduu anaè koñ ená a ye a ku cu, e fa fúú bguèu ka'.	The woman who has an unbelieving husband, and he is content to live with her, let her not leave her husband.
Joân aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Masaè, weèr aè yá ñwáè moè' e ce fúr yú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe a wáâ rlii, weèr aè laa neè ye ená e fa keèr geèe wa' ka' njobeè' e yu moè' efa seâe mú ka'.”	"John answered, ""Master, we saw someone casting out demons in your name, and we forbade him, because he doesn't follow with us."""
E ka' yá aèmboè beèe magoèr efa múè beèe Farïìsi, ba beèe Saduèsïî, a vúè ená e bo baèptir woweèe, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Boo bfïî, ñwáè ce e báá weèe tá weèe bo cañ soèrti efa rshentee ce Nyúè be ko'si neè beèe naè aè báá nda?	"But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming for his baptism, he said to them, ""You offspring of vipers, who warned you to flee from the wrath to come?"
Woweèe aè m laèa enáê, “E m jaè' beèe mo', a moo aè rjaè' yi tu laèr. E yu ñkúú beèe Isráèl; e suu laè embe kïìntaa seè'ni na, tá seèe bo byemi neè ye.	"He saved others, but he can't save himself. If he is the King of Israel, let him come down from the cross now, and we will believe in him.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	27	43	E láè ntee njep Nyúè, baná Nyúè ka' koñ ye, e fúr laè ye efa ñgá', njobeè' e m laèa ená a ye Muu Nyúè.”	He trusts in God. Let God deliver him now, if he wants him; for he said, 'I am the Son of God.'"
Yuu ce m ce laèa neè weèe aèlúèsimbuèu seè'ni yi yu ená weèe ba cuâu mo'sir, ce koosimnse neè beèe, koñni aèmboè bfúr boo ma wa'a, gee ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe, ker lor yeè nyor njep nsheè.	Finally, be all like-minded, compassionate, loving as brothers, tenderhearted, courteous,
Yaa ŋgʉp zhi kyèshi.	My fowls have hatched.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, nlaâa Tata Jisoès yi du aè ñgoèñ neè ñger-ñwáè.	So the word of the Lord was growing and becoming mighty.
Pol aè kwa'shïì ená yi yu yáánïì ená a woweèe a du ka' njobeè' Joèn Mak aè m maè'shi woweèe aè ñkúè rfaè' aè ñgoâñ Paèmfilïìyaè a du yi yu.	But Paul didn't think that it was a good idea to take with them someone who had withdrawn from them in Pamphylia, and didn't go with them to do the work.
E ka' vúè yá weèr, a fyáá muu cáè' ce Pol aè m cúú nje bú', a cúú mi mkuèu ba mi mkoo aègho, a laa enáê, “Yú' Rara yi laèa ená Jus aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a be kur ñwáè ce e túr muu cáè' ca aè njáâá wa'a, fa ye neè beèe enje jáá.”	"Coming to us, and taking Paul's belt, he bound his own feet and hands, and said, ""Thus says the Holy Spirit: 'So will the Jews at Jerusalem bind the man who owns this belt, and will deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles.'"""
E lupni nè ncir haar à fʉr emba mʉʉ botòrò.	He has struggled with the cork until he has removed it from the bottle.
Ñwáè ce e be laèa ená seèe aè gweè nsa' yu nda? Ñwáè moè' yu ka', njobeè' Jisos Kraâis ce e m kwe, a ker lo a fúú efa rkwe foñ, cu seè'ni na aè rkoo maâ' Nyúè, a ce loo a seèe btuè.	Who is he who condemns? It is Christ who died, yes rather, who was raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us.
Ka' ba aè noèñ anaè, ñwáè aè ka' ba mbe tu ndap, yïì buu ba mbe ndaèp, e fa keèr suèu embo aè rloèr buu anaè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' ke ba aè mñkúè foñ, e fa keèr kúti aè rloèr yuu mo' embo ka'.	In that day, he who will be on the housetop, and his goods in the house, let him not go down to take them away. Let him who is in the field likewise not turn back.
Duè neè du fyá', yá ka ená yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ce laèa enáê, ‘Yuu ce m ce koèñ yu ñkoosimnse, ke' ba ba tañshïì ka'’ naè, yi yu ba ená ká lá? Máè vúè aè rká' beâe byáánïì ka'. Máè vúè aè rká' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.”	"But you go and learn what this means: 'I desire mercy, and not sacrifice,' for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."""
kèʼmbàa [kèʔ-mbàː] voc.	sorry; it’s a pity, Pidgin ashia.
Mkuŋ mi ke bii, banɛ a be ce ŋwaŋ nè bghòo.	When masquarade jujus are dancing, they will be sprinkled with blessing liquid.
Seèe aè ka' ce láè mmir mbenduè Jisos Kraâis ená e be kuè jaè' seèe ba njep ñgoèñ na caè'caè', baná seèe yu beèe ce a ba koosimnse neè seèe caèa beèe enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá.	If we have only hoped in Christ in this life, we are of all men most pitiable.
Tɛɛ nè ŋgoo baa, tɛ m̀ bo zhi à rbèʼ wèe.	You stand two lines so that I will be able to count you.
Ñwáè ka' gee yuu ce ntee yi bep beèe, baná ñgaèñ aè geèe ba neè máè ka'. E geèe yuu anaè goèr ba neè weèe wááwá. Baná m ker laa tatap aèmboè yuu anaè ka'.	But if any has caused sorrow, he has caused sorrow, not to me, but in part (that I not press too heavily) to you all.
Máâ koèñ tá weèe riñ boèñboñ ená Jisos Kraâis yu tu neè mbañruèñwáè, mbañruèñwáè aè ba tu neè njeñwáè, Nyúè aè ba tu neè Jisos Kraêis.	But I would have you know that the head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Weèe lor buu enjep mú, gaèpshi neè ñgaâa fuèp, tá buu wááwá bo ba brara neè weèe.	But give for gifts to the needy those things which are within, and behold, all things will be clean to you.
M yu ñwáâ ñká' efa múè beèe wááwá ce a yu ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisoès. Máè ghááte aè njáèá ñwáè ce aède' beèe a ba loèr máè ená m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisoès ka' njobeè' máè m fa ñgá' neè ñgaâa coêr.	For I am the least of the apostles, who is not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the assembly of God.
M be tuusi beèe a mmbaa tá a du suñ wa blaèa neè beèe. Woweèe a be yar bcáâ' njïì rkwe. M be fa woweèe ñger tá a cep ya ntuu aè mnoèñ ncúèkïì neè mnoèñ mjeèe-mmbaa ba mnoèñ mntuunfu.”	"I will give power to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy one thousand two hundred sixty days, clothed in sackcloth."""
Beèe a m ce suñ aèmboè Jisoès goèr, ñkúú Hároèd aè yu'. Beèe moè' a m ce laèa ená a Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe ce e fúú efa rkwe, a mbuèu ce e túr ñger aè rgeèe njáèá buu bghagha' ca wa'a.	"King Herod heard this, for his name had become known, and he said, ""John the Baptizer has risen from the dead, and therefore these powers are at work in him."""
Rkùʼsi rli ba nè Nyʉ embe bùu.	Glory be to God in Heaven.
E ka' natïì embe dïì' ce e ba ce geèe rloo naè, kúti, a yá ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aèmboè a ce buumi njobeè' woweèe a m koosimnse goèr a sáê.	When he rose up from his prayer, he came to the disciples, and found them sleeping because of grief,
Blaèa ce a sañ enáê, “A m yá ye aè ñwáâ nyáánïì” naè, a m ku sañ ba njo' Abraèham caè'caè' ka',	Now it was not written that it was accounted to him for his sake alone,
Beèe wááwá a m báèáñger seê, a laa enáê, “Waè' ñwáè ca yu Muu Dávïìd a?”	"All the multitudes were amazed, and said, ""Can this be the son of David?"""
Beèe a m loèr bbishïîr, ba bcáè' mfaè' ce vi m joèo Poêl, a duè joèo beèe ce a m ce yañse aègho, woweèe a luñ efa waâp byañ, byú' bbebep vi fúú enjep woweèe.	so that even handkerchiefs or aprons were carried away from his body to the sick, and the evil spirits went out.
Beèe mo' a ká' a ce ce ye neè mce, a cete ye mmir, a túshi ye neè bdúè' a laa neè ye enáê, “To' ka' ñwáè ce e túshi wáè neè bdúè'.” Beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè a koo ye, a lïîp.	"Some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to beat him with fists, and to tell him, ""Prophesy!"" The officers struck him with the palms of their hands."
Baná weèe fúr yuu bebep ca efa weâe mú tá weèe bo ba brara. Yi yu mini ená weèe yu war brara njobeè' a m tañshi tañshïì neè Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe njeèe tañshïì.	Purge out the old yeast, that you may be a new lump, even as you are unleavened. For indeed Christ, our Passover, has been sacrificed in our place.
Wèr à bɛ̀ɛ ŋkaa anà njobèʼ e kùʼ sê.	We were astonished at that monkey because it is very big.
Pailáèt aè ka' yu' wa'a, a bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a?”	But when Pilate heard Galilee mentioned, he asked if the man was a Galilean.
Wáè yá mkaèñsïì ce m túr mbaè bo maè' a ker yá mú btábuèr saèamba ce a ke tooshi blam mbo naè. M be suñ wáè mbuèu efa buu ca. Mkaèñsïì saèamba ca mi táá aètu bcïìndap saèamba ce a ce keè'ni bcor saèambaê, mú btábuèr saèamba ca aè ba bcor saèambaê.”	the mystery of the seven stars which you saw in my right hand, and the seven golden lampstands. The seven stars are the angels of the seven assemblies. The seven lampstands are seven assemblies.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a m kúti a yá ye, a suñ ye buu ce woweèe a m geèe, ker ba buu ce woweèe a m duè a yá'ni beèe.	The apostles gathered themselves together to Jesus, and they told him all things, whatever they had done, and whatever they had taught.
Pitaè aè kuushïì yuu ce yi mú ba, a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Rabaèi, yá ce ce wáè mú cáp naè aèmboè yi yuushi.”	"Peter, remembering, said to him, ""Rabbi, look! The fig tree which you cursed has withered away."""
Ghee mo' yi m táá aèfo, mruâ' mcece' mi ba njo jiñ. A m lor kúèsha a fúú njep múè mruè' anaè a kur aè mbaèñ a naa mbekïì, a túr ye aègee cuèu.	Now a vessel full of vinegar was set there; so they put a sponge full of the vinegar on hyssop, and held it at his mouth.
Beèe mo' a m ba aèfo aè nfeè' ce Jisoès aè m ce laèa neè kúr beèe anaè, a suñ Jisoès aèmboè beèe moâ' aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, ce Pailáèt aè m yúshi, wap bláá vi fiñshïì nyor aè múè bláá mnyaèa ce woweèe a m vúè aègho, a tañshïì tañshïì aègho neè woweèe.	Now there were some present at the same time who told him about the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices.
E m ká' yi ñgaâa mfaè' beèe nrúêú, a fa woweèe ncúèkïì moè'sir, moè'sir, a laa enáê, ‘Geèe neè ntaa neè mbaèa ca caar tá m ke kúti.’	He called ten servants of his, and gave them ten mina coins, and told them, 'Conduct business until I come.'
E ka' duè baè' yá rboèñ Nyúè a waâp mú, a lu'shi, a tapse woweèe, a laa neè woweèe neè ñger-ñwáè ená woweèe a ku ce yu'ni neè Tata neè nteâe mo'sir.	who, when he had come, and had seen the grace of God, was glad. He exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they should remain near to the Lord.
Weèe gee wa'a njobeè' laèa ce enáê, “Koèñ nfúroè aèmboè wáè koèñ yoè nyor” naè, yi kur mncir wááwá.	"For the whole law is fulfilled in one word, in this: ""You shall love your neighbor as yourself."""
Ñwáè ce e geèe wáè aè ñwáâ ñgoèr aè geèe nda? Yuu ce aè túr ce wáè koni ba ese Nyúè ka', yu ká? Nyúè aè ka' fa wáè buu ca, wáè ka' ce naèa tu aèmboè wáè túr lá buu ca ba aè yo ñger wa'a njoká?	For who makes you different? And what do you have that you didn't receive? But if you did receive it, why do you boast as if you had not received it?
Yi ka' ba wa'a, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a seesïì aèmboè a be yú Lasoèroès,	But the chief priests conspired to put Lazarus to death also,
Yuu ce yi geèe seèe riñ ená beèe a yu boo Nyúè káè a yu boo Sataèn áè, yu ená ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe yáánïì ka' baná ñgaèñ yu muu Nyúè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá koèñ nfúr yïì ka' baná ñgaèñ yu muu Nyúè foñ ka'.	In this the children of God are revealed, and the children of the devil. Whoever doesn't do righteousness is not of God, neither is he who doesn't love his brother.
Jisoès aè ka' maè' mñgaèa ca neè woweèe mïìsi, a loâ aèfo,	It happened that when Jesus had finished these parables, he departed from there.
Mbuèu moè' aè m ker ba aègho ená a suñ ye aèmboè ñwáè ka', njobeè' e m rïìñ buu ce beèe a ce kwaè'shi wáá.	and because he didn't need for anyone to testify concerning man; for he himself knew what was in man.
Tomas aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Yaè Tata ba yaè Nyúè.”	"Thomas answered him, ""My Lord and my God!"""
Njáèá mncir ca vi loè gee beèe a yu'nïì aègho, lor wap mnyor njep nsheè ker fa ñgá' neè yaèp nyor. E ba aè nfeè' ce beèe a káè' ce láè mncir anaè yi yáátïì aèmboè vi geèe beèe a túr lá bfee wa'a, vi banïì túr ñger aè rjaè' ñwáè tá e borni yuu ce yïì nyor ce koèñ ená e gee ka'.	Which things indeed appear like wisdom in self-imposed worship, and humility, and severity to the body; but aren't of any value against the indulgence of the flesh.
Fa bepsi neè ntee cárcár ka'. Ñwáè moè' ka' gee yuu bebep neè weèe, weèe foosïì ye. Tata Jisoès aè foèosi weèe efa yeè buu bbebep, baná weèe foosi beèe mo' foñ.	bearing with one another, and forgiving each other, if any man has a complaint against any; even as Christ forgave you, so you also do.
Mncir vi m ce naèshi seèe tá Jisos Kraâis ka' vúè, tá seèe ce seèe aè byemi neè ye naè bo ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	So that the law has become our tutor to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by faith.
Ntukùu anà yu deŋrì sê.	That toe is very thin.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè beèe Isráèl, AÈsayaè aè m sañ yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa enáê, “Máè maè' ma mmbo neè yaè beèe, káâ' aè ñgaèptú' du ba' aè mbuèuñkuèr, woweèe a tee btu, a yu'ni neè máè ka'.”	"But as to Israel he says, ""All day long I stretched out my hands to a disobedient and contrary people."""
Túè' aè ka' káè' ce raa, Pol aè bu' mmbo neè woweèe wááwá ená woweèe a ye yuu. E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè yá mluè, a cu neè njeè aè mnoèñ ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú, a joo yuu kuè cuèu ka'.	"While the day was coming on, Paul begged them all to take some food, saying, ""This day is the fourteenth day that you wait and continue fasting, having taken nothing."
Ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a m ce vúè aètútú neè Jisoès aè ryu' buu ce e m ce yá'ni.	Now all the tax collectors and sinners were coming close to him to hear him.
Baná wáè ka' tá rïìñ aè rfyá' aè bkuè' ce vi bep na neè mini-ñwáè ka', aède' fa nda bkuè' mini neè wáè.	If therefore you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches?
M ker ce laèa ená ñwáè moè' fa kwaè'shi ená m yu lúr ka'. Weèe ka' ce kwaè'shi ená m yu lúr, weèe ku ma'shi tá m laa nlaâa nyu' nyor aèmboè aède' lúr laêa.	I say again, let no one think me foolish. But if so, yet receive me as foolish, that I also may boast a little.
Ñwáè moè' embe ntáè' Lávïì ye ye aè ka' vúè baè' mbo yá ye, a lá' a caa a duê.	In the same way a Levite also, when he came to the place, and saw him, passed by on the other side.
AÈmboè máè ce m yu Tataê, a ker ba Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, máè ka' su'si me mkuèu, baná weèe ce su'si mkuâu bfúr wee foñ.	If I then, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, you also ought to wash one another's feet.
E bʉ̀r làa ce wèr ye à ba tʉr nà nè bèe moʼ.	He has disclosed the discussion I had with him to other people.
E lɛʼ nè rsii rbebep àmbò mutù à tʉʉ ye na.	He got up with ill luck as a car has knocked him.
Jisoès aè táá, a laa enáê, “Ká' neè ye.” Woweèe a laa neè nfeèp anaè enáê, “Kur ntee, nati mbekïì, e ce ká' wáè.”	"Jesus stood still, and said, ""Call him."" They called the blind man, saying to him, ""Cheer up! Get up. He is calling you!"""
Weâe mïìsi wáá, vú neè naè' ce e ruusi, sáá, tá seèe ye ce lu'shi,	Bring the fattened calf, kill it, and let us eat, and celebrate;
Ŋwɛ̀ mboro à cwaʼshi ye nè sàʼ.	The Bororo man has pierced him with a knife repeatedly.
E m laèa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená woweèe a niñ mbe keñ, tuu neèñguu roè entombïì, tá e laasi beèe anaè.	Immediately Jesus made the disciples get into the boat, and to go ahead of him to the other side, while he sent the multitudes away.
E m túr bsii wañ a Nyúè, a loo ená Nyúè fa ye njïì tá e ba'ri ndap neè Nyúè Jakoèp.	who found favor in the sight of God, and asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Musïìs aè m maè'shi ená weèe juu wee bbyeèñge njobeè' weèe teèe btu seê. Yi m ba wa'a efa rkáè' ka'.	"He said to them, ""Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it has not been so."
Túè' aè ka' raa, e ká' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a ce beèe ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú efa waâp mú, a too woweèe ená ñgaâa ntuu.	When it was day, he called his disciples, and from them he chose twelve, whom he also named apostles:
Woweèe a lo a tuu beèe Farïìsi mo' ba beèe vi ñkúú Hároèd ená a vú bipshi buu neè Jisoès tá a bo roèo njïì ce a be geèe tá e ka' faèa nlaèa.	They sent some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to him, that they might trap him with words.
Ñwáè ce e m kwe na aè fúú aèmboè a m kur mi mkoo ba mi mkuèu neè bcáè', a boo vi bsii neè bcáè' naè. Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baè'shi neè bcáè' tá e duê.”	"He who was dead came out, bound hand and foot with wrappings, and his face was wrapped around with a cloth. Jesus said to them, ""Free him, and let him go."""
Ka' yi yu wa'a, beèe wááwá a byemi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ka'. AÈsayaè aè m laèa enáê, “Tataê, ñwáè moè' yu ce e byemi yuu ce weèr aè laèa ka'.”	"But they didn't all listen to the glad news. For Isaiah says, ""Lord, who has believed our report?"""
Anaès ba Kaifaès a m ba btu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè.	in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to John, the son of Zacharias, in the wilderness.
Naètanïìyáèl aè laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, a wáè Muu Nyúè. A wáè ñkúú aè to' Isráèl.”	"Nathanael answered him, ""Rabbi, you are the Son of God! You are King of Israel!"""
Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Musïìs aè m ka' ba laa ená mbañruèñwáè fa ñwaè' neè njeñwáè aè rduèñshi ená e saè'si guèu, ka' juu ye njoká?”	"They asked him, ""Why then did Moses command us to give her a bill of divorce, and divorce her?"""
E ke ba aè nfeè' seèe ce ye byee Nyúè, see loo, yoñshi ye aè ndoñ mruè' ce see ke no. Seâe ce no enjep ndoñ anaè yi ce duèñshi ená seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu aèbee njo' vi bláá. Seâe ce bá'shi byee, yi ce duèñshi foñ ená seèe woweèe yu aèbee njo' yïì nyor. Mboè yi yu wa' a?	The cup of blessing which we bless, isn't it a sharing of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, isn't it a sharing of the body of Christ?
Zhii ŋgèe zhi gaa mɛ̀ njobèʼ e ke lìp boo vii sê.	His character repels me because he beats his children too much.
Yá neè, e ce laèa buu aèwañ, ñwáè aè ke' ce laèa yuu neè ye ka'. Seemoè' beâe bgoèrgoèr a yá ená e yu Kraâis anaè.	Behold, he speaks openly, and they say nothing to him. Can it be that the rulers indeed know that this is truly the Christ?
E ka' ce loo, vi bsii vi kupseè a ba aè njáâá jáá, vi bcáè' vi fúp a ce laè'ñger.	As he was praying, the appearance of his face was altered, and his clothing became white and dazzling.
M ce loo neè wáè aè mnoèñ wááwá, a ce yoèñshi Nyúè ce m ce faè' neè ye neè ntee rara aèmboè wa bta a m ce faè' naè.	I thank God, whom I serve as my forefathers did, with a pure conscience. How unceasing is my memory of you in my petitions, night and day
E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a bááñgeèr seê, a laa fa waâp mú enáê, “Baná ñwáè ce aède' e luñ yu ba nda?”	"They were exceedingly astonished, saying to him, ""Then who can be saved?"""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè weèe aè ce geèe ñgeèe ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ce geèe, a ker ce yu'ni ba neè ñkúú embe dïì' ce byú' bbebep vi ce cu, aè ba dïì' ce yi yu ba mbekïì. Ñkúú ca yu yú' ce yi ce faè' njep mntee beèe ce a teèe btu neè Nyúè.	in which you once walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the power of the air, the spirit who now works in the children of disobedience;
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a m geèe ku' buu bbáèá ba buu bghagha' aè múè beèe. Ñgaâa rbyemïì wááwá a m ce vúè aèbee mbe njïì baaki ñkúú Solomúèn.	By the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders were done among the people. They were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.
A m bi máè aè ñwáè Isráèl mbe ntáè' Bánjamáèn, yaè ta ba yaè ma a ba beèe Hibruès ce mini, máè ka' baè' ñgaèa moè'sir, a gee máè búè. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mncir ce a láè, máè m ba ñwáè Farïìsïî.	circumcised the eighth day, of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; concerning the law, a Pharisee;
Seèe ce laèa seená woweèe a yu ñgaâa Mboâñtu njobeè' woweèe a m táá tatap aè nfeè' ñgá'. Weèe aè m yu' aèmboè Jup ce e m kur ntee aè nfeè' ce rmoèoshïì li m vúè neè ye, a ka' loè embenjïì mo, Nyúè aè fa ye ku' buu. Baná weèe riñ ená Taèr Nyúè boèñ ñgeèe, a ba ñwáè ñkoosimnse seê.	Behold, we call them blessed who endured. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the Lord in the outcome, and how the Lord is full of compassion and mercy.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a m ce roèo mú njáèá nduunjïì mo' aè ryú Jisoès njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp beèe.	The chief priests and the scribes sought how they might put him to death, for they feared the people.
Nyúè ce e túr ku' buu bboèñboñ be fa weèe buu wááwá ce weèe buu. E be caèasi buu anaè mbe bo Jisos Kraêis.	My God will supply every need of yours according to his riches in glory in Christ Jesus.
Ká' embe nfeè' anaè, beèe magoèr efa ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ma'shïì ye, a ker ce kar a ye ka'.	At this, many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him.
E cɛ̀ŋ mbàa banɛ m be kèr fa ye moʼ kaʼ.	He has underestimated the amount, therefore I will not give him more.
Bkar waê, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe gheter ja' weêe mnyor tá weèe bo táá aè buu Nyúè ce weèe aè byemi, ce vi boèñ aè misïî. Ce loo neè aè ñger Yú' Rara aè nfeè' wááwá.	But you, beloved, keep building up yourselves on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit.
Nteèendúñ anaè aè koo aè keñ, keñ aè moo aè rduè laèr, weèr aè boñlaèr a ma'shïî, e lor keñ a ce duè aègho.	When the ship was caught, and couldn't face the wind, we gave way to it, and were driven along.
Yàa taa yu ŋwɛ̀ coʼ ŋgàŋ.	My father castes demons.
Laèa neè neè beèe ce a ce laèa ená ndoèo co' weèe naè ená Nyúè ghoni woweèe, ker loo foñ neè beèe ce a ce fa ñgá' neè weèe.	bless those who curse you, and pray for those who mistreat you.
Jisoès a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a m duè ba' aè ñgoèñ beèe Gáèrasaè ce yi m ba neèñguu rdip rgoèr.	They came to the other side of the sea, into the country of the Gadarenes.
E ku cu à rgèe mcɛ̌r.	He is still playing games.
A faèdïì' ce a m taa Jisoès mbe kïìntaa. A m taa beèe mo' a baa mbe bkïìntaa foñ. Moè' aè m ba aè bo ñkoèp Jisoès moè' aè ba yi aè bo maè', Jisoès aè ba yi mbetar.	where they crucified him, and with him two others, on either side one, and Jesus in the middle.
A ka' yá muu ca, a suñ Josáèf ba Máèári yuu ce ncïìndap Nyúè aè suñ woweèe aèmboè muu anaè.	When they saw it, they publicized widely the saying which was spoken to them about this child.
Baná njáèá ñgá' ce weèe ce yá na yu ba njïì ce Nyúè ce yá'ni weèe. Cena yi duèñshi ená Nyúè aè loèr weèe aèmboè boo vi. Waè' muu moè' aè m be ba ce e ka' gee yuu bebep, taèr ke' lip ka' a?	It is for discipline that you endure. God deals with you as with children, for what son is there whom his father doesn't discipline?
AÈmboè m ce geèe ba buu ce m ce koèñ aè rgeèe ka' na, ce geèe ba máè ka', ce geèe ba buu bbebep ce vi yu njep máâ ntee.	But if what I don't desire, that I do, it is no more I that do it, but sin which dwells in me.
Woweèe a du embenjïì a cepshi beèe mo' ená woweèe a nya' mnde' mbe tu Stáfaèn. Woweèe a ká' a laa enáê, “Weèr aè yu' aèmboè e ce nya' mnde' a ce bepsi rlii Musïìs ba Nyúè.”	"Then they secretly induced men to say, ""We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses and God."""
AÈ ka' ba yi neè beèe ce Nyúè aè ká', káè yu Jus áè, káè yu Greâk áè, woweèe a rïìñ ená ñger Nyúè yi yááti, bfee Nyúè vi yáátïì foñ embenjïì Jisoès Kraêis.	but to those who are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
Be ba aè mñwáá ta anaè tá woweèe a roo rkwe, yá ka'. Woweèe a be koèñ aè rkwe tá rkwe li táá woweèe.	In those days people will seek death, and will in no way find it. They will desire to die, and death will flee from them.
Weèr yu aèmboè beèe ce a ce koosimnse wa'a, geewa'a weèr ce lu'shi aè nfeè' wááwá. Weèr yu aèmboè ñgaâa fuèp wa'a, geewa'a weèr ce geèe beèe magoèr a ce koni bkuè'. Weèr yu aèmboè beèe ce a túr buu ka' wa'a, geewa'a weèr a túr buu wááwá.	as sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
Saimún Pitaè aè ka' tose yi a ku niñ ba njep rsheè, a yá bcáè' ce vi m noèñ njo,	Then Simon Peter came, following him, and entered into the tomb. He saw the linen cloths lying,
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ máná weèe riñ yuu ce beèe a m be riñ ka', faè dïì' weèe bo ce kwaè'shi ená weèe túr bfee se ka'. Yi yu ená beèe Isráèl a be kuè cip btuè' nfeseè ka'. A be kuè cip btuè' caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce beèe wááwá efa múè beèe enje jáá ce a ba byemi, a byemi naè.	For I don't desire you to be ignorant, brothers, of this mystery, so that you won't be wise in your own conceits, that a partial hardening has happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles has come in,
Mɛ̀ dù kù ntaa, yaa ŋguu zhi cir.	I went to the market and my firewood was not sold.
Woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rgeèe ba yuu ce vúse Nyúè vúse woweèe ka'. Woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rgeèe ba yuu ce ku'si ba beèe kuè'si woweèe.	for they loved men's praise more than God's praise.
Bfúr waê, m rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe yu beâe bboèñboñ seê, a riñ buu seê, a riñ aè rcep weèe btu.	I myself am also persuaded about you, my brothers, that you yourselves are full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish others.
Ñwáè rbyeè ba ñwáè rñwañshi neè mdip a ku ba yáánïì. Nyúè be laè' ñwáè wááwá aè rfaè' ce ñgaèñ aè geèe.	Now he who plants and he who waters are the same, but each will receive his own reward according to his own labor.
Yuu ce máè m geèe neè bcor mo' a ke' gee neè weèe ka', yu ká? Yuu ce máè m geèe neè weèe ka' ku ba ba ená máè m ba ntáèr neè weèe ka'. Máè geèe faèa. Foèosi neè máè.	For what is there in which you were made inferior to the rest of the assemblies, unless it is that I myself was not a burden to you? Forgive me this wrong.
Bfúr waê, wee weèe aè rïìñ ená rcaè'nïì ce weèr aè m vúè ca'ni weèe naè li m ba aè cicïì ka'.	For you yourselves know, brothers, our visit to you wasn't in vain,
Weèe aè láè yi nlaèa njep weâe mntee ka' njobeè' weèe aè byemi neè ñwáè ce e m tuu naè ka'.	You don't have his word living in you; because you don't believe him whom he sent.
Beèe Farïìsi ba beèe mo' efa waâp mú ce a m ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a rú'ñgeèr, a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès enáê, “Weèe ce yeñger a ce noñger weèe ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' weèe ker ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep njoká?”	"Their scribes and the Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, ""Why do you eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?"""
Woowèe a ba ku du nè yap kùu.	They just went there themselves.
Ñwáè moè' efa waâp mú ce a m ce too ená Kïìlopaès, aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Waè' ku ba ba wáè efa múè beèe wááwá ce a vúè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ce e rïìñ buu ce vi koni aèfo aè mnoèñ ca ka' a?”	"One of them, named Cleopas, answered him, ""Are you the only stranger in Jerusalem who doesn't know the things which have happened there in these days?"""
Jus a ká' a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce roèo aè rduè ba fá, a ka' ce laèa ená seèe be yá ye ka'? E ce roèo aè rduè yá yïìseèe beèe ce a yu aè bto' mo' tá e bo cu a woweèe, yá'ni beâe aè to' anaè a?	"The Jews therefore said among themselves, ""Where will this man go that we won't find him? Will he go to the Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?"
Beèe embe ndaèp rloo a ka' beè' embe ñwaâ' mncir keèr beè' embe ñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, beèe ce a m ba btu embe ndaèp rloo a tuu ñwáè ená e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Bfúr weêr, weèe aè ka' túr ncep moè' aè rfa neè beèe, weèe fa.”	"After the reading of the law and the prophets, the rulers of the synagogue sent to them, saying, ""Brothers, if you have any word of exhortation for the people, speak."""
Weèr aè m cu aè rla' ca aè mñwáá btaar a ka' co'ti a ce duè mbe keñ yïû aè rla' AÈláèksandaè ce a m ce too ená Mfar Mnyúè. E m táá aè rla' ca njep múè roè káâ' aè cuèu saa caar saa aè mïî.	"After three months, we set sail in a ship of Alexandria which had wintered in the island, whose sign was ""The Twin Brothers."""
AÈ ce laèa wáná aède' aè yá'ni blúr, ker yá'ni foñ beèe ce a rïìñ buu ka', njobeè' mncir vi fa wáè bfee, a gee wáè riñ yuu mini.	a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of babies, having in the law the form of knowledge and of the truth.
Doktà à mʉ baasi ye mnsur.	The doctor has forbidden him (to eat) pepper.
Koo ŋwàʼ ca ghashi nè mɛ̀.	Take this book and hold for me.
A máè Joân ce m yu nfúr weèe, seèe aè ba aèbee aètu Jisos Kraêis. Seèe yu aèbee aè ñgá' ce seèe ce yá. Jisos Kraâis yu yïìseèe ñkúú. Seèe ce yá ñgá' ca wa'a, a ke' ce sáè ka'. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè', a koo máè a du aègho aè dïì' mo' ce a m ce too ená Patmoès ce rdip rgoèr li m sïìr a kaari a tarte. A m koo máè a du aègho aèfo njobeè' blaâa Nyúè ce máè m ce feè'shi kuu Jisos Kraêis.	I John, your brother and partner with you in oppression, Kingdom, and perseverance in Christ Jesus, was on the isle that is called Patmos because of God's Word and the testimony of Jesus Christ.
Seèe aè ka' ce keè' yuu ce seèe aè be yá ka', baná seèe be kur ntee ce keè' yi.	But if we hope for that which we don't see, we wait for it with patience.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Njeèndoñ ca aè laèa njo' máè ka', e laèa njo' weèe.	"Jesus answered, ""This voice hasn't come for my sake, but for your sakes."
Máèári aè ka' yu', a sa'ti mbekïì a du a koni ye.	When she heard this, she arose quickly, and went to him.
Máè laèa buu ca neè weèe tá weèe bo lu'shi foñ aèmboè máè, tá le rlu'shïì anaè li bo mïìsi.	I have spoken these things to you, that my joy may remain in you, and that your joy may be made full.
Baná weèe fa káè' ce tarni ka' njobeè' beèe ce a ka' táá tatap ba' aè lúèsimbuèu, baná Nyúè be laè' woweèe boèñboñ seê.	Therefore don't throw away your boldness, which has a great reward.
Njeè be keèr yañ woweèe ka'. Ntee mdip yi be keèr luèu woweèe ka'. Nyúè ce e ke sañ na be toèo woweèe ka'.	They will never be hungry, neither thirsty any more; neither will the sun beat on them, nor any heat;
Weèe aè geèe wa' ka'. Yuu weèe aè geèe ye, yi yu ená ñwáè moè' ce geèe faèa neè moè', moè' aè ce fïìp moè', ka' weèe wááwá yu bfúr wa'a.	No, but you yourselves do wrong, and defraud, and that against your brothers.
Yi yu wa'a, tá woweèe a ce keè' keèr keè', yá ka', a ce yu'shi ce yu' ka', faè dïì' a bo kupse, maè' yaèp buu bbebep tá Nyúè foosi woweèe ka'.”	"that 'seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest perhaps they should turn again, and their sins should be forgiven them.'"""
Pailáèt aè byemïì, e suusïì gúâú ñwáè embe kïìntaa, a kur njep bcáâ' bboèñboñ, a lá njep rsheè ce a m soè' nje ryáá, aè ba rsheè ce a m be tuñ ñwáè njo ka'.	He took it down, and wrapped it in a linen cloth, and laid him in a tomb that was cut in stone, where no one had ever been laid.
Govanoè aè ka' yu' nsuñ ca, weèr yá ye nashi neè ye, faè dïì' weèe niñ aè ñgá' ka'.”	"If this comes to the governor's ears, we will persuade him and make you free of worry."""
AÈmboè seèe túr yïìseèe ñwáè tañshi tañshïû ñgoèr ce e yu mbenduè beèe Nyúè na,	and having a great priest over the house of God,
Yi geèe mnsa' ka'. Káè woweèe aè ce feè'shi ba aè ntee bebep áè, káè a ce geèe ba aè ntee boèñboñ áè, beèe a ce yu' aèmboè Jisos Kraêis. A yuu ce yi geèe m ku ce lu'shi.	What does it matter? Only that in every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is proclaimed. I rejoice in this, yes, and will rejoice.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, tá Nyúè bo lu'shi aè rfa weèe fáñ tá weèe bo niñ mbe nto' Tata Jisos Kraâis ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè', tá seèe woweèe bo cu mbo nfeseè.	For thus you will be richly supplied with the entrance into the eternal Kingdom of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
Nyúè aè ka' tá fa weèe ñgá' njo' yuu bebep ce weèe aè geèe aèmboè e ke geèe neè boo vi wááwá naè ka', baná weèe yu boo bsuu.	But if you are without discipline, of which all have been made partakers, then are you illegitimate, and not children.
Nfeè' moè' aè m ba ce máè m rïìñ mncir ka', a ku ba nteèe. Mncir vi ka' vúè, yuu bebep yi ba teèe,	I was alive apart from the law once, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
“Duè neè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, suñ beèe buu wááwá ce vi kuèu ryoâñ rfi ca.”	Go stand and speak in the temple to the people all the words of this life.
Seèe fa ce saèki aèmboè beèe mo' efa woweèe a m saèki naè ka'. Woweèe a m saèki wa'a, beèe ncúèkïì-ncoèp-taar-aè-mmbaa a kweñgeèr aè noâñ mo'sir.	Neither let us commit sexual immorality, as some of them committed, and in one day twenty-three thousand fell.
Ŋgɛʼ à zhɛ̀ɛ mbàa kaʼ, zhìi mâ à ku ce tàa ye à cicì.	Ngeh did not steal the money; his mother is blaming him unjustly.
Kyer wáè Sisiguès ce aè yu mini aè rfaè' ce soè ce faè' aèbee, jaè' bbyeèñge ca, njobeè' weèr woweèe aè m ce reè aèbee tá m bo feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe. Kláâmáèn ye ye aè m ce reè weèr ye, ker ba beèe mo' ce a m ce faè' weèr woweèe naè; mlii beèe anaè mi yu mbe ñwaè' Ryoèñ.	Yes, I beg you also, true yokefellow, help these women, for they labored with me in the Good News, with Clement also, and the rest of my fellow workers, whose names are in the book of life.
Nlo aè ye ye mbaèa; nlo ca be keè fa weèe aè ñgá', ye weèe ba aèmboè mor ce yi toèo ñwáè wa'a. Weèe aè baashi ye mbaèa a lá aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì.	Your gold and your silver are corroded, and their corrosion will be for a testimony against you, and will eat your flesh like fire. You have laid up your treasure in the last days.
Ŋwɛɛ Saa [ŋwɛ̄ː sáː] cn 7.	month of October.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè rfúú ce beèe ce a kweñger a be keè fúú efa rkwe, Musïìs ye ye aè m duèñshi ená ca yi yu wa'a. Mbe dïì' ce e m sañ aèmboè ce ce mor yi m ce káti mbo naè, e ce too Tata Nyúè mbo naè ená Nyúè Abraèhaêm, ba Nyúè Aisïìk ker ba Nyúè Jakoèp.	But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the bush, when he called the Lord 'The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.'
Woweèe a ker bipshi neè ñwáè anaè enáê, “AÈmboè ñwáè anaè aè geèe wáè, wáè ce yá buu seè'ni na, wáè laèa yo wá ká aèmboè ye?” E beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè anaè yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.”	"Therefore they asked the blind man again, ""What do you say about him, because he opened your eyes?"" He said, ""He is a prophet."""
Jus mo' a lo a vúâ aè rla' Antïìyoèk ba IÌkonïìyoèm, a ka' beèesi mntee ese beèe, a woweèe bsïìp a túúshïì Pol neè bluèr, a ka' kwaè'shi ená e kwe, a súñ aè nsheè a fúú aègho efa laè'.	But some Jews from Antioch and Iconium came there, and having persuaded the multitudes, they stoned Paul, and dragged him out of the city, supposing that he was dead.
Yi ba wa'a, a ku'sïì Jisos Kraâis njo' weèe, ku'si wee weèe foñ njo' ye. Bkuè' ca vi be ba wa'a njobeè' ntee boèñboñ ce yïìseèe Nyúè ba Tata Jisos Kraâis a túr neè seèe.	that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and you in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Máè rïìñ seè'ni máná blaè' ce a kupshi a lá neè máè njo' ya ñgeâe yáánïì vi yu aègho. Ñwáè ce e be keè fa máè blaè' anaè be keè fa Tata Jisoès ce e ke sa' vi mnsa' yáánïì. E be keè fa máè blaè' ca aè noèñ ce e vúè. E be keè fa ba neè máè caè' ka. E be keè fa neè beèe wááwá ce a ce nyaèñnyañ aè ryá noèñ ce e be vúè anaè.	From now on, there is stored up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will give to me on that day; and not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his appearing.
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè beesïì enáê, “A máè Gaberyaè ce má ke táá aè bsii Nyúè. Nyúè aè tuu máè ená m vú cep ntuu boèñboñ ca neè wáè.	"The angel answered him, ""I am Gabriel, who stands in the presence of God. I was sent to speak to you, and to bring you this good news."
Mɛ̌ kwàʼshi enɛ rbì rca a rlaa.	I think this kola nut is mine.
E m ku lá Pitaè mbe shañ; yi ka' ba wa'a, ñgaâa cor a ce loo neè ye neè mini- ñwáè.	Peter therefore was kept in the prison, but constant prayer was made by the assembly to God for him.
Ñwáè aè ka' lor yi tu ená e yu ñwáè, ce e yu ñwáè ka', baná ñgaèñ ce bo' yi tu.	For if a man thinks himself to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
Baná mkaè'ni anaè mi yu ba neè beèe ce a byemi. Yi yu wa'a tá yi bo ba rara ená e ce fa buu ce e m kaè' anaè neè seèe njo' yi ntee boèñboñ, tá buu anaè bo ba aègho neè ñgúè Abraèham wááwá, keè' kuè ba ba neè beèe ce a ce láè mncir ka', vi bo ba aègho neè beèe ce a byemi neè Nyúè aèmboè Abraèham aè m byemi naè foñ. Abraèham yu taèr neè seèe wááwá.	For this cause it is of faith, that it may be according to grace, to the end that the promise may be sure to all the seed, not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all.
A lor bcáâ' bbúú a fa woweèe e mo'sir mo'sir, a laa neè woweèe ená woweèe a táá nfeè' múcaèr njobeè' beèe mo' efa beèe Nyúè ce a be mïìsi yúshi aèmboè a m yúshi woweèe naè a ku báti.	A long white robe was given to each of them. They were told that they should rest yet for a while, until their fellow servants and their brothers, who would also be killed even as they were, should complete their course.
AÈde' ñkwaèa yi cu mbe ndaèp ñwáè nfeseè ka'. Ñwáè ce e ke cu mbo nfeseè a muu ñwáè ndaèp anaè.	A bondservant doesn't live in the house forever. A son remains forever.
E ka' yá ce fik aèmboè yi táá aè njïìsaèp, a túr ku' bfuè seê, e du a fyá' ená yi yú lá. A ka' baè', a yá yuu mbo caa efa bfuè caè'caè' ka', njobeè' nfeè' fik e ke yú aè m gháá ka'.	Seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came to see if perhaps he might find anything on it. When he came to it, he found nothing but leaves, for it was not the season for figs.
Jisoès aè karsïì nyor, a laa enáê, “Bbyeèñgeâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, weèe fa war neè máè ka', war neè ba neè wee btu, ker ba neè boo wee,	"But Jesus, turning to them, said, ""Daughters of Jerusalem, don't weep for me, but weep for yourselves and for your children."
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Fa geèe wa' ka'. M ku ba ñwáè ce m ce geèe rfaè' Nyúè aèmboè wáâ geèe foñ naè. M ku ba aèmboè wáè ba bfúr wo ce a yu ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, a ker ba aèmboè beèe wááwá ce a ce geèe buu ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca. Gú'shi ba neè Nyúè.”	"He said to me, ""See you don't do it! I am a fellow bondservant with you and with your brothers, the prophets, and with those who keep the words of this book. Worship God."""
Ñgwañkúñwáè aè ka' tá caèa bfeè' mntuunfu keèr ba foñ ba njeñwáè ce e m ku túr nduu moè'sir ka', weèe fa sañ li rlii aè múè mlii byepkúú ka'.	Let no one be enrolled as a widow under sixty years old, having been the wife of one man,
Mo' foñ yi yu ená seèe ce lu'shi aè ñgá' ce seèe ce yá njobeè' seèe rïìñ seená ñgá' e ke geèe ñwáè e kur ntee;	Not only this, but we also rejoice in our sufferings, knowing that suffering works perseverance;
Sañ buu ce wáè yá na mbe ñwaè'. Sañ buu ce vi be koni seè'ni ker ba buu ce vi bii ka' koni.	Write therefore the things which you have seen, and the things which are, and the things which will happen hereafter;
Beèe mo' a yu ce weèe aè ba fúr enjep mor, tá woweèe a luêñ. Beèe mo' a yu ce weèe aè ba koosi mnse neè woweèe, keèr ce wáp; káè yu wap bcáè' ce vi ce sii njobeè' yap ñgeâe bebep ce a ce geèe anaè áè, weèe fa joèo neè bo ka'.	and some save, snatching them out of the fire with fear, hating even the clothing stained by the flesh.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe yi mbuèu efa ñgaèa ca ka' a? Weèe aè ka' tá yi ka', baná aède' weèe gee wee ká ka' yi mbuèu efa mñgaèa wááwá?	"He said to them, ""Don't you understand this parable? How will you understand all of the parables?"
“Yaè beèe Isráèl, yu' neè yuu ce m be laèa na. Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt aè m ba ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m duèñshi ená e m ce ye. E m duèñshi wa'a neè buu bghagha' ce Jisoès aè m geèe, ba mncoèo ce e m duèñshi a weâe mú aè ñger Nyúè. Wee weèe rïìñ buu ca boèñboñ.	"Men of Israel, hear these words! Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved by God to you by mighty works and wonders and signs which God did by him in the midst of you, even as you yourselves know,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	23	Nyúè aè m maè'shi Jisoès mbe weâe mmboè aèmboè e m láè, a yi wáá ená yi be ba. Weèe aè fa ye neè ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, a taa ye mbe kïìntaa, e kweê.	him, being delivered up by the determined counsel and foreknowledge of God, you have taken by the hand of lawless men, crucified and killed;
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	24	Ka' e m kwe wa'a, Nyúè aè m fúr ye efa rkwe, a gee e luñ efa mluâ rkwe, njobeè' rkwe li m túr ñger aè rláè ye mbaè yir ka'.	whom God raised up, having freed him from the agony of death, because it was not possible that he should be held by it.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	25	Dávïìd aè m laèa yuu a kuu ye enáê, ‘Máè m yá ená Tata ku ba weèr ye aè nfeè' wááwá. E yu aè la rkoo maè', aède' yuu mo' yi ci' máè ka'.	For David says concerning him, 'I saw the Lord always before my face, For he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	26	A mbuèu ce ya ntee yi m lu'shi, la rlee li ce yoèp neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè. Yi yu foñ ená m be cu ce keè' yuu ce Nyúè be geèe neè máè,	Therefore my heart was glad, and my tongue rejoiced. Moreover my flesh also will dwell in hope;
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	27	njobeè' m rïìñ máná aè be maè'shi tá m cu mbaè yir ka'. AÈ be maè'shi tá yoè muu rfaâ' nrara kwe, búète ka'.	because you will not leave my soul in Hades, neither will you allow your Holy One to see decay.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	28	Wáè duèñshi máè mnduunjïû ryoèñ. AÈ be geèe tá m lu'shi seê, njobeè' aè ku ba weèe soè.’	You made known to me the ways of life. You will make me full of gladness with your presence.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	2	29	“Bfúr waê, yi yu rara ená Dávïìd ce e m ba yïìseèe tarkú naè aè m kwe, a tuñ ye, li rsheè li ku bii aègho caar gháá ntïìni.	Brothers, I may tell you freely of the patriarch David, that he both died and was buried, and his tomb is with us to this day."
E ka' suñ woweèe buu wááwá, a tuu woweèe aè rla' Jopaè.	Having explained everything to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Weâe ke yá aè nfeè' ce bce anaè vi káè' a ce top, weèe ku riñ weená nfeè' mbeèñ yu aètútú.	When they are already budding, you see it and know by your own selves that the summer is already near.
E m co' seèe aè li rkoèñ, a laa yïì nlaèayá, a gee seèe aè ba boo vi, tá seèe bo ba entombïì neè buu wááwá ce e m boo naè.	Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures.
Ñwáè ce rïìtu yi ce koo ye neè máè, ker ba neè wa blaèa embe njáèá nfeè' e seè'ni ce beèe a ce kani Nyúè, a ker ce geèe buu bebep na, baná rïìtu yi be keè koo Muu Ñwáè neè ye foñ mbe nfeè' ce e be keè vúè a bcïìndap Nyúè ce brara weèe neè foèo yïì Taê.”	"For whoever will be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of Man also will be ashamed of him, when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy angels."""
Kraâis aè m niñ ba mbe dïû' rara ce aè m kupshi ba beèe ka'. Dïì' ce aè m kupshi ba beèe anaè yi táá ba aètu dïì' ce Nyúè yu. E m niñ mbe buèu mbe dïì' ce Nyúè yu, tá e bo táá a seâe btuè aè bsii Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá.	For Christ hasn't entered into holy places made with hands, which are representations of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us;
Jisoès a beesïì enáê, “M ce suñ weèe máná beèe ca a ka' cumúnyañ, bluèr ca vi ku yoêp.”	"He answered them, ""I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out."""
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca mïìsi, a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê,	It happened, when Jesus had finished all these words, that he said to his disciples,
Yi yu ená a ker bi weèe, weèe aè ke' ba boo beèe ce a ke loè ku kweñger naè ka'. Weèe yu ba boo ñwáè ce aède' e ke kwe ka'. Yu Nlaèa Nyúè ce yi yu teèe, a túr ñger nfeseè, ce yi geèe weèe aè ka' ba boo vi.	having been born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God, which lives and remains forever.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger mbenduè ryáá naè táá aètu beèe ce a yu' blaâa Nyúè, yu' rboèñ aègho seê, geewa'a, blaèa anaè vi ke' taa mñgaèñ njep woweèe ka'. Woweèe aè loè ku byemi ba aè mú nfeè' moè', e ba aè nfeè' ce rmoèoshïì li vúè neè woweèe, woweèe a ku kúti njïìnjïì.	Those on the rock are they who, when they hear, receive the word with joy; but these have no root, who believe for a while, then fall away in time of temptation.
Be ba aè nfeè' ce ncïìndap Nyúè yïì elúèsimbuèu (yïì embenjïì bcïìndap ntuunfu) aè fyáp rsoèñ li naè, tá rfaè' Nyúè li mïî, tá buu Nyúè ce vi m ba aè bsúèti naè vi yááti aèwañ, tá yi bo kuè ba aèmboè e m suñ yi ñgaâa ncep ntuu.”	but in the days of the voice of the seventh angel, when he is about to sound, then the mystery of God is finished, as he declared to his servants, the prophets.
Nfeè' ntee msini anaè aè ka' gháá, ñwáè ca aè tuu yïì ñwáè rfaè' moè' ená e du yá beèe ce e m láè nsuu neè woweèe naè, koo msini mi.	When it was time, he sent a servant to the farmer to get from the farmer his share of the fruit of the vineyard.
A mboè mnsa' anaè vi yu aè njáèá enáê: Rraa li vúè njep ñgoèñ, beèe a koñ ba túè'nji a caa rraa njobeè' woweèe a ce geèe buu bbebep.	This is the judgment, that the light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light; for their works were evil.
Woweèe a ka' yu' wa'a, túè' aè ka' ce raa, woweèe a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a yá'ni beèe. Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba yïì beèe a m ká' bleebeèe embe kansuèr wááwá, a tuu beèe ená a du fúr woweèe embe shañ vú aègho.	When they heard this, they entered into the temple about daybreak, and taught. But the high priest came, and those who were with him, and called the council together, and all the senate of the children of Israel, and sent to the prison to have them brought.
E ka' niñ mbe ndaèp, mmbañruè ca a vú a yá ye. E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè byemi ená aède' m gee weèe yá buu a?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “ÁÈno, Tataê.”	"When he had come into the house, the blind men came to him. Jesus said to them, ""Do you believe that I am able to do this?"" They told him, ""Yes, Lord."""
Jisoès aè waa tatap seê, a laa enáê, “Yaè Taê, máè fa la ryoèñ mbe wáâ mmboè.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a ko'si ryoèñ, a kwe.	"Jesus, crying with a loud voice, said, ""Father, into your hands I commit my spirit!"" Having said this, he breathed his last."
Tá beèe wááwá ce a ce yá'ni woweèe buu Nyúè a fa buu moè' efa buu bboèñboñ ce a túr neè ñwáè ce e ce yá'ni woweèe.	But let him who is taught in the word share all good things with him who teaches.
Nyúè aè m geèe wa'a tá e bo tee beèe ce mncir vi m kur woweèe naè, tá seèe bo ba boo Nyúè.	that he might redeem those who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of children.
Woweèe a ka' caèa bsoogáè ce a m táá entoèmbïì ker ba beèe embenjïì mo, a ba' aè cuèu ñka' bkwaèñ ce a caèa mbo niñ ba aè múè la', yi mú'tïì neè yi bo, woweèe a fúêú, a ka' ce jáèr njep nduunjïì mo', ncïìndap Nyúè aè ma'shïì ye kaâñ mo'sir, a duê.	When they were past the first and the second guard, they came to the iron gate that leads into the city, which opened to them by itself. They went out, and went down one street, and immediately the angel departed from him.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e rïìñ aèmboè Tata e ke kwaè'shi yu nda? Ñwáè ce aède' e cep ye yu nda?”	For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?
Yap ñgeèe yi ce duèñshi ená mncir Nyúè anaè vi yu njep waâp ntee ghup. Wap bfee vi ce geèe woweèe a riñ wa'a foñ njobeè' woweèe a geèe yuu boèñboñ, ku rïîñ, a geèe yuu bebep, ku rïîñ.	in that they show the work of the law written in their hearts, their conscience testifying with them, and their thoughts among themselves accusing or else excusing them)
Jisoès aè du a ye, ku' beèe moè' foñ a du a yeâ mbuèu, a ce nyoèrni, a fate ye.	He went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and they pressed upon him on all sides.
Baná a mbuèu ce m ce sañ buu ca neè weèe ka' loè vúè caè'ni weèe. M ce sañ wa'a faè dïì' m bo loèr ñger ce Tata Nyúè aè fa máè, ghashi weèe ba neè mmbo mtatap aè nfeè' ce m ka' vú ka'. Nyúè aè m fa máè ñger anaè tá m bo tapsi weèe aègho, ke' ba ba ená m sáási weèe aègho ka'.	For this cause I write these things while absent, that I may not deal sharply when present, according to the authority which the Lord gave me for building up, and not for tearing down.
E gee beèe magoèr ce a m ce yañ byañ njáèá jáá jáèá jáá, a ke'seè, a ker fúshi byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe magoèr. E m sheè ená byú' anaè vi fa laèa yuu ka' njobeè' vi m rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce e yu.	He healed many who were sick with various diseases, and cast out many demons. He didn't allow the demons to speak, because they knew him.
Jisoès aè ker duê, a loo a laa enáê, “Yaè Taê, yi ka' ba ená aède' ndoñ ca caa embe máâ tuè ka', baná aè gee tá yuu ce aè ce koèñ yi geetïî.”	"Again, a second time he went away, and prayed, saying, ""My Father, if this cup can't pass away from me unless I drink it, your desire be done."""
E ka' kúti, a ker yá woweèe a ce buumi, mmirloè mi ku ce duè neè woweèe duè.	He came again and found them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
A ka' ce tuu, e buumïì. Ka' cu, fu' mo' yi vú neè ñger-ñwáè seê, mdip mi ká' a ce niñ mbe keñ, yi ba bebep neè woweèe.	But as they sailed, he fell asleep. A wind storm came down on the lake, and they were taking on dangerous amounts of water.
Beèe enje jáá a ka' yu' ca, a lu'shi seê, a ku'si Tata aè vi blaèa. Beèe ce Nyúè aè m ce ená a bo koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè a m byemi.	As the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and glorified the word of God. As many as were appointed to eternal life believed.
E ka' geèe wa' wáá, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Moè' efa weèe aè ka' túr muu mbañruè káè naè' áè, e gwe njep rwee nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, aède' e caasïì nfeè' efa rfúr enjo a?”	"He answered them, ""Which of you, if your son or an ox fell into a well, wouldn't immediately pull him out on a Sabbath day?"""
Yá neè ená ñwáè fa kúsi yuu bebep neè yuu bebep ka'. Gheèter neè aè rgeèe ba buu bboèñboñ. Geèe neè buu bboèñboñ ca neè ñwáè wááwá ce e yu a weâe mú ker ba beèe enjepmbeè foñ.	See that no one returns evil for evil to anyone, but always follow after that which is good, for one another, and for all.
Bfúr waê, m koèñ máná weèe aè ba kuushi buu ce vi m koni viseèe bta aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ce daè' aè rïìñ naè boèñboñ. Mmbaè' vi m ce keè'ni woweèe. Woweèe a m tuu ma rdip mo' ce a m ce too ená rdip rbeer neè mkuèu.	Now I would not have you ignorant, brothers, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea;
Wáè ka' laèa eku wáâ cuèu ená Jisos yu Tataê, byemi enjep wáâ ntee ená Nyúè aè m fúr ye efa rkwe, baná aè be luèñ.	that if you will confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord, and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead, you will be saved.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè ker vúê, a laa enáê, “Li gweè. Ma rla' rgoèr ce a too ená Babiloèn naè li gweè. AÈ m ba rla' ce li m geèe bto' wááwá vi no mi mruè' ce yu saèkïì, a ce saèki foñ aèmboè woweèe.”	"Another, a second angel, followed, saying, ""Babylon the great has fallen, which has made all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her sexual immorality."""
Seèe rïìñ ená ñwáè tañshi tañshïì e ke ce yi tu tá beèe a bo ce yu'ni neè ye ka'. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e ke ce ñwáè tañshi tañshïì aèmboè e m ce Ároèn naè.	Nobody takes this honor on himself, but he is called by God, just like Aaron was.
Wɛ̌ yeŋger à baatè cùu.	Close your mouth when eating.
Woweèe a vú neè mbúè mbaèa a fa neè ye, e bipshïì enáê, “Tu ñwáè embo na a yi nda, rlii ce a sañ mbo na aè ba rlii nda?” Woweèe a beèesi neè ye enáê, “Tu embo a yïû ñkwe Ruêm, rlii embo aè ba li foñ.”	"They brought it. He said to them, ""Whose is this image and inscription?"" They said to him, ""Caesar's."""
E m maè' ñgaèa neè woweèe aè ryá'ni woweèe ená woweèe a ba ce loo aè nfeè' wááwá, keè' ce koosi bsáè aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	He also spoke a parable to them that they must always pray, and not give up,
M ce suñ weèe ená be keè ba neètú' anaè, tá beèe a mmbaa a noñ mbe bkuu, tá a lor moè', ma'shi moè'.	I tell you, in that night there will be two people in one bed. The one will be taken, and the other will be left.
A m fa nyaèa ca ñger ená e naatu, cáp Nyúè. A m fa ye ñger ená e gee yuu ce e koèñ aègho aè mñwáá ncoèp-baa-aè-mkyeèe.	A mouth speaking great things and blasphemy was given to him. Authority to make war for forty-two months was given to him.
Weèe ce too máè ená Ñwáè Ryá'nïì, a ker ce too máè ená Tataê. Weèe ce too yáánïì njobeè' m yu wa'a.	You call me, 'Teacher' and 'Lord.' You say so correctly, for so I am.
Ma boo vi Sábáèdi aè m vúè a boo vi weèe, a yá Jisoès. E m gweè njep yeâ tïìi, a laa ená e gee yuu neè ye.	Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, kneeling and asking a certain thing of him.
Ntee yi ka' ce yañ nfúroè njobeè' aè ce ye njáèá byee mo', baná aè ker ce koèñ ye ka'. Fa maè'shi tá byee vi kúti ba yuu ce yi be geèe tá ñwáè ce Kraâis aè m kwe a yeâ tuè gwe ka'.	Yet if because of food your brother is grieved, you walk no longer in love. Don't destroy with your food him for whom Christ died.
Mboè a ye kapintaè ce muu Máèári a? Mboè e yu nfúr Jáêms, ba Joseès, ba Jud ker ba Saimúèn a? Mboè bjar vi a yu seèe woweèe aèfa a?” A ka' laèa wa'a, a kani ye.	"Isn't this the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James, Joses, Judah, and Simon? Aren't his sisters here with us?"" They were offended at him."
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Nyúè Taèr aè m fa ñger ba foèo neè Jisos Kraâis naè, njeèndoñ Nyúè ce e túr foèo ce vi caèa ñger aè m laèa enáê, “Muu ca a muu waè ce máè koèñ seê. M ce yu' rboèñ neè ye.”	"For he received from God the Father honor and glory, when the voice came to him from the Majestic Glory, ""This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."""
Ñwáè aè ka' túr bfee aè rfeè'shi blaâa Nyúè, tapsi beèe aègho, baná ñgaèñ fe'shïî. Nyúè aè ka' gee ñwáè riñ aè rfa beèe buu, baná ñgaèñ fa mmbo mtoo. Ñwáè ka' túr bfee aè rba tu neè beèe, e sa' beèe neè yi ntee-ñwáè. Ñwáè aè ka' túr bfee aè rjaè' beèe, ñgaèñ ja' neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè.	or he who exhorts, to his exhorting: he who gives, let him do it with liberality; he who rules, with diligence; he who shows mercy, with cheerfulness.
Yá neè ená cumúnyañ ce e loè ese Jisos Kraâis ba njep weâe mntee aè buu wááwá ce weèe ce geèe, njobeè' Nyúè aè ká' weèe ená weèe ba aèbee aèmboè ñwáè moè'sir, neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè. Ce yoñshi neè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá.	And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to which also you were called in one body; and be thankful.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, aède' m naatu aè yuu mo' caa efa rkwe ce Tata Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa naè ka'. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' li rkwe anaè, buu enjep ñgoèñ na aè kúti buu bcicïì neè máè. Buu anaè yu neè máè aèmboè bgúâú buu wa'a, má máè aè ba aèmboè gúâú yuu wa'a, neè buu anaè.	But far be it from me to boast, except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through which the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
Woweèe a m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aè rla' anaè, a gee beèe magoèr a byemïì, a ba ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès. A ka' mïìsi, a kúti a caa rla' Listraè ba IÌkonïìyoèm, a ba' aè rla' Antïìyoèk aè ñgoâñ Pïìsidïìyaè.	When they had preached the Good News to that city, and had made many disciples, they returned to Lystra, Iconium, and Antioch,
Judaès ce e m fyeèni ye naè aè m suñ woweèe wáá enáê, “Ñwáè ce m ka' baa nje nyoèr baná a ye. Koo neè ye du aègho, ke'ni boèñboñ faè dïì' e cañ ka'.”	"Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, ""Whoever I will kiss, that is he. Seize him, and lead him away safely."""
Weèe kwa'shi wa'a njobeè' weèe aè m kwe, le ryoèñ li ba njep Jisos Kraâis ce e yu a Nyúè, Nyúè aè kupshïì ryoèñ anaè a lá neè weèe.	For you died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Máè suñ weèe wáá ená a máè ye. Yi ka' ba ená weèe ce roèo ba máè, weèe ma'shïì tá beèe ca a duse.”	"Jesus answered, ""I told you that I am he. If therefore you seek me, let these go their way,"""
To wáè byemi ená Nyúè ku ba moè'sir. Wáè geèe yáánïì. Kuushi wáná byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi ku byemi wa' foñ, a ce wáp a ce kaèñ.	You believe that God is one. You do well. The demons also believe, and shudder.
Ñwáè fa loèr posaè, káè baèa, káè blaba' ka'. Ñwáè fa caè'ni ñwáè aè nduunjïì ka'.	Carry no purse, nor wallet, nor sandals. Greet no one on the way.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Gaèliyoè aè m ba govanoâ aè ñgoâñ AÈkayaè, Jus a m tar cuèu, a koo Pol a du aègho mbe koêr.	But when Gallio was proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord rose up against Paul and brought him before the judgment seat,
Ca yu yuu ce Nyúè aè m laa aèmboè rfúú ce yi m ba ená e be keè fúú efa kwe keèr duè mbaè yir búète ka' naè. E m laèa enáê, ‘M be fa wáè buu brara ce máè m kaè' neè Dávïìd, rtarnïì li ba njo ka' naè.’	"Concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now no more to return to corruption, he has spoken thus: 'I will give you the holy and sure blessings of David.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	35	E ker laa mbe dïì' mo' foñ enáê, ‘AÈde' aè ma'shïì yoè ñwáè rfaâ' nrara, e kwe búète ka'.’	Therefore he says also in another psalm, 'You will not allow your Holy One to see decay.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	36	Dávïìd aè m geèe buu ce Nyúè aè m koèñ ená e gee mbe nfeè' yïì. A ka' geèe, a kwe. A m tuñ ye aègee vi btarkú, e búteè.	For David, after he had in his own generation served the counsel of God, fell asleep, and was laid with his fathers, and saw decay.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	37	Ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m fúr efa rkwe naè, aè m búète yi ka'.	But he whom God raised up saw no decay.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	38	Baná aèmboè yi yu wa' na, bfúr waê, weèe aè ba rïìñ ená yu ba njo' ñwáè anaè ce a ce feè'shi neè weèe ená aède' Nyúè foosïì buu bbebep ñwáè.	Be it known to you therefore, brothers, that through this man is proclaimed to you remission of sins,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	39	Weèe aè ba rïìñ ená ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' byemi neè ye baná ñgaèñ be luèñ efa buu wááwá ce aède' ncir Musïìs yi m ba gee ñwáè e luñ efa gho ka'.	and by him everyone who believes is justified from all things, from which you could not be justified by the law of Moses.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	40	Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' yuu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m laèa, yi lo koni weèe ka'.	Beware therefore, lest that come on you which is spoken in the prophets:
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	13	41	Woweèe a m laèa enáê, ‘Yáê, weèe ce weèe ce jaèasi buu Nyúè, báèáñger neè, kweñger, njobeè' m be geèe rfaâ' mo' aè nfeè' yeè, tá ba rfaè' ce ñwáè moè' aè m ka' suñ weèe, weèe byemïì ka'.’ ”	Behold, you scoffers, and wonder, and perish; for I work a work in your days, a work which you will in no way believe, if one declares it to you.'"
“Máè m ba aè rla' Jopaè a ce geèe rloo a yá njáèá rlo mo'. Máè m yá aèmboè yuu mo' yi ce suèu embe buèu aèmboè ma cáâ' báèbár wa'a, a ghashïì aè bcuèu kyeèe efa gho a suusi njep nsheè. Yi m suèu a máâ geñ.	"I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision: a certain container descending, like it was a great sheet let down from heaven by four corners. It came as far as me.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	6	Máè ka' fyá' njo boèñboñ, a yá mnyaâa aè laè' ba mnyaâa aè rïìñ, ker ba buu moè' aèmboè mnyo ba bbar, ba bsiñ.	When I had looked intently at it, I considered, and saw the four-footed animals of the earth, wild animals, creeping things, and birds of the sky.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	7	Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ moè' aè laèa neè máè enáê, ‘Pitaè, naèti mbekïì, sháshi, ye.’	I also heard a voice saying to me, 'Rise, Peter, kill and eat!'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	8	Máè laa ya yu mánáê, ‘Tataê, máè ka', yuu ce ncir yi kani beèe efa rye yi m be niñ ku máâ cuèu ka'.’	But I said, 'Not so, Lord, for nothing unholy or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	9	Njeèndoñ ca aè ker laa embe buèu enáê, ‘Nyúè aè ka' gee yuu yi ba rara, aè fa loèr yuu anaè aèmboè yuu ce yi raa ka' ka'.’	But a voice answered me the second time out of heaven, 'What God has cleansed, don't you call unclean.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	10	Ca yi m koni nfeè' taar, a súñ buu anaè wááwá a ko' aègho mbe buèu.	This was done three times, and all were drawn up again into heaven.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	11	AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' anaè seeseê, beèe a mntaar ce a m tuu aè rla' Sisaèriyaè ená a vú yá máè, a vú a ba' mbe ndaèp ce máè m ce cu mbo.	Behold, immediately three men stood before the house where I was, having been sent from Caesarea to me.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	12	Yú' Rara yi laa neè máè ená m fa wáp aè rduè weèr woweèe ka'. Bfúr beèe ntuunfu ca a m duè weèr woweèe, weèr woweèe aè ka' baè', a niñ mbe ndaèp ñwáè anaè.	The Spirit told me to go with them, without discriminating. These six brothers also accompanied me, and we entered into the man's house.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	13	E suñ weèr aèmboè e m yá ncïìndap Nyúè a vú a niñ mbe ndaèp a laa enáê, ‘Tuu beèe a rla' Jopaè tá woweèe a du vúè neè Saimúèn ce li rlii mo' li yu ená Pitaè naè.	He told us how he had seen the angel standing in his house, and saying to him, 'Send to Joppa, and get Simon, whose surname is Peter,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	14	E be suñ wáè nsuñ ce e be geèe tá wáè ker ba beèe embe wáâ ndaèp wááwá a luêñ.’	who will speak to you words by which you will be saved, you and all your house.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	15	Máè ka' káè' ce laèa neè beèe embe ndaèp anaè, Yú' Rara yi suu mbe waâp nduè aèmboè yi m suèu mbe seâe nduè efa rkáè' naè.	As I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, even as on us at the beginning.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	16	Máè kuushïì nlaèa ce Tata aè m laèa enáê, ‘Joân aè m baèptir beèe neè mdip, geewa'a, a be baèptir weèe ba neè Yú' Rara.’	I remembered the word of the Lord, how he said, 'John indeed baptized in water, but you will be baptized in the Holy Spirit.'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	11	17	Nyúè aè m ka' ba fa rfa ce e m fa neè seèe mbe nfeè' ce seèe aè m byemi neè Tata Jisos Kraâis naè neè woweèe foñ, máè m ba nda ka' sáni weèr ye?”	If then God gave to them the same gift as us, when we believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I, that I could withstand God?"
Jus a roèo aè ryá ncoèo ka' byemi yuu ce beèe a laèa, Greâk a ce roèo yap ba bfee.	For Jews ask for signs, Greeks seek after wisdom,
Naèti táá mbekïì, njobeè' máè vúè tá m bo ce wáè aè yaè ñwáè rfaè', ker ba aè ñwáè ce aè be ce suñ beèe buu ce wáè yá ese máè ntïìni na, ker ba vïì ce m be loè duèñshi wáè.	But arise, and stand on your feet, for I have appeared to you for this purpose: to appoint you a servant and a witness both of the things which you have seen, and of the things which I will reveal to you;
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Wáè ka' ce koèñ aè rba yáánïì se aè bsii Nyúè, aè du fyeni yoè buu wááwá, lor mbaèa efa gho, gapshi neè ñgaâa fuèp, tá aè bo túr bkuè' mbe buèu. Wáâ geèe wa' wáá, vú a máâ mbuèu.”	"Jesus said to him, ""If you want to be perfect, go, sell what you have, and give to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and come, follow me."""
Woweèe a ce cu aè túè'nji, a túr ka' mú bábá' efa ryoèñ ce li loè ese Nyúè ka', njobeè' woweèe a teèe btu, a riñ yuu ka'.	being darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God, because of the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardening of their hearts;
Njùʼ à làa enɛ Taantoʼ a ndur zhìi.	Njuh has said that Tantoh is her brother.
Gwàgwaʼ e ke fɛŋ àmbo siŋ waʼa.	A duck flies like a bird.
Máâ cu weèr Jus weèe, gee ñgeèe aèmboè woweèe wa'a, tá m bo so woweèe neè Jisos Kraêis. Ka' mncir Musïìs vi kur máè ka' wa'a, máâ cu weèr beèe ce mncir ca vi kur woweèe, gee ñgeèe aèmboè mncir ca vi kur lá máè foñ wa'a. M ce geèe wa'a, tá m bo so beèe anaè neè Jisos Kraêis.	To the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain Jews; to those who are under the law, as under the law, that I might gain those who are under the law;
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè njïì ce aède' ñwáè ba yáánïì njo' rbyemïì, e laa enáê, “Fa laèa njep wáâ ntee enáê, ‘AÈde' ko' nda mbe buèu lá?’ ka' (ce yi yu ená, Be suèu nda neè Kraâis embe buèu lá?).	"But the righteousness which is of faith says this, ""Don't say in your heart, 'Who will ascend into heaven?' (that is, to bring Christ down);"
A ba ce bèʼ bèe ce a be dù a tiisi Nfò.	When they were counting those who were to go, Nfor was omitted.
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa enáê, “Yi yu mini wa'a, Tataê, to ñgwe yi ke kuè ce ye mkúè' baa ce mi gweèñger embe tábuèr yaèp ta foñ.”	"But she said, ""Yes, Lord, but even the dogs eat the crumbs which fall from their masters' table."""
Káè yu ba njáèá sá' ká ce máè m túr enjep múè buu anaè áè, máè yá seè'ni máná buu anaè wááwá vi m ce búsi máè búsi, a ma'shi vi wááwá tá m bo duè ba aèmbuèu Jisos Kraêis.	However, what things were gain to me, these have I counted loss for Christ.
Ñger Nyúè yi m ba a woweèe, beèe magoèr a byemïì neè Tataê, a kupse, a ma' yaèp buu bbebep.	The hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number believed and turned to the Lord.
Bfúr waê, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe koo ncep ca mmbo mmbaa. Ñwaè' ce máè sañ neè weèe na yi saèp ka'.	But I exhort you, brothers, endure the word of exhortation, for I have written to you in few words.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a lá mi mmbo mbe yeâ nduè, e ku naa nyor mbekïì, a yoñshi Nyúè.	He laid his hands on her, and immediately she stood up straight, and glorified God.
Seèe rïìñ ñwáè ce e m laèa enáê, “Ku ba máè ce m be kúúsi mcucu', m be laè' woweèe.” E m ker laèa foñ enáê, “Tata Nyúè be sa' yïì beèe.”	"For we know him who said, ""Vengeance belongs to me,"" says the Lord, ""I will repay."" Again, ""The Lord will judge his people."""
Geewa'a ñwáè ca aè duê, a ká' a ce suñ yuu anaè neè beèe aè bdïì' wááwá. Nsuñ ca aè m geèe Jisoès aè ker ce fúú aè múè beèe ka'. E m ce cu aè rïìñ, beèe a ce vúâ aè bdïì' wááwá, a ce yá ye aèfo.	But he went out, and began to proclaim it much, and to spread about the matter, so that Jesus could no more openly enter into a city, but was outside in desert places: and they came to him from everywhere.
E m maè' ñgaèa neè woweèe enáê, “Fyá' neè ce fïîk, ker ba bce wááwá.	"He told them a parable. ""See the fig tree, and all the trees."
Mñwaè' ce weèr aè sañ neè weèe naè, buu embo wááwá vi yu brara, a ba kuèyáá. Weèe aè be riñ weèr seè'ni na boèñboñ ka'. Baná m ce kwaè'shi máná weèe be loè rïìñ weèr boèñboñ tá weèe bo loè naèa tu neè weèr aèmboè weèr be loè naèa neè weèe foñ aè noèñ ce Tata Jisoès be vúè.	For we write no other things to you, than what you read or even acknowledge, and I hope you will acknowledge to the end; as also you acknowledged us in part, that we are your boasting, even as you also are ours, in the day of our Lord Jesus.
Weèr ce suñ nsuñ mini aè nfeè' wááwá, a ce geèe buu ba aè ñger Nyúè. Yer ñgeâe yáánïì yi yu aèmboè buu bïìr ce weèr bo maè' bïìr aègho neè Nyúè, keèr tá'shi yeèr nyor aègho.	in the word of truth, in the power of God; by the armor of righteousness on the right hand and on the left,
E ka' laèa wa'a, a laa neè njeñwáè ca enáê, “Máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep.”	"He said to her, ""Your sins are forgiven."""
Loo neè neè weèr tá weèr bo koni njïì aè rsuñ nsuñ ce e m ba aè bsúèti aèmboè Jisos Kraâis naè, neè beèe. M yu mbe shañ seè'ni na njobeè' máè m ce suñ nsuñ anaè neè beèe.	praying together for us also, that God may open to us a door for the word, to speak the mystery of Christ, for which I am also in bonds;
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir foñ njobeè' wee ke láè mntáèr ce vi ce rïìr seê, mbenduè beèe moè'. Weâe ke naèa ntubo la' woweèe aè mntáèr anaè ka'.	"He said, ""Woe to you lawyers also! For you load men with burdens that are difficult to carry, and you yourselves won't even lift one finger to help carry those burdens."
Mfaè' ñwáè wááwá mi be keè yááti aèwañ njobeè' be keè ba aè noèñ mnsa' tá a mooshi mfaè' ñwáè wááwá. Mor yi be keè ce káti aè noèñ anaè, geèe tá a riñ njáèá mfaè' ce ñwáè wááwá aè m ce geèe.	each man's work will be revealed. For the Day will declare it, because it is revealed in fire; and the fire itself will test what sort of work each man's work is.
Rlii rli yû?	You have eaten all the kola nuts.
Máè m ba mbaè mmbo Yú' Nyúè, ncïìndap Nyúè aè lor máè a du aègho aè ntee rïìñ. Máè ka' baè' aèfo a yá njeñwáè aèmboè e cu mbenduè nyaâa mbembep, nyaèa anaè aè ba mbeer. A m sañ mlii aè nyor nyaèa anaè wááwá, aè ba ba mlii ce a m ce cáp ba Nyúè aègho. Nyaèa anaè aè m túr btu saèambaê, a túr mdoñ rúêú.	He carried me away in the Spirit into a wilderness. I saw a woman sitting on a scarlet-colored animal, full of blasphemous names, having seven heads and ten horns.
Bfúr waê, weèe ku bii ce kuushi njáèá mfaè' ce weèr aè m ce geèe aè nfeè' seèe aè m ba weèr aè ce suñ Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè weèe naè. Weèr aè m ce faè' neètú' ba neèmootïì faè dïì' weèr bo ba ntáèr neè ñwáè moè' ka'.	For you remember, brothers, our labor and travail; for working night and day, that we might not burden any of you, we preached to you the Good News of God.
Yu ba embe ndúè' ñwáè ca ce Nyúè aè fúr ñwáè ce e be geèe beèe a luêñ, a fa neè beèe Isráèl aèmboè e m kaè' woweèe. Ñwáè rluèñ ca yu Jisoès.	From this man's seed, God has brought salvation to Israel according to his promise,
Yi yu yáánïì ená ñgaèpni yi ba a weâe mú, njobeè' e ke ba ne aè nfeè' ce ñgaèpni yi niñ wa'a, weèe ka' yá beèe ce a yuu beâe mini.	For there also must be factions among you, that those who are approved may be revealed among you.
Yi yu wa'a, faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo naèa nyor aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	that no flesh should boast before God.
E ka' ce niñ aè mú rla' mo', ñgaâa yañ msaèasïì beèe nrúêú a vú aè ryá ye. A ka' vúè, a táá encaèñ seê,	As he entered into a certain village, ten men who were lepers met him, who stood at a distance.
Jisoès aè m ker niñ mbe keñ, a tuu neèñguu roè. A ka' baè' njo, ku' beèe a vú a kaari aèwaâa roèo.	When Jesus had crossed back over in the boat to the other side, a great multitude was gathered to him; and he was by the sea.
Woweèe a ka' ce duè, a yá rdip mo', ñwáâ nsoèñ ca a laa enáê, “Yáê, a rdip na. Yuu ce aède' yi jepsïì wáè efa rbaèptir máè yu ká?”	"As they went on the way, they came to some water, and the eunuch said, ""Behold, here is water. What is keeping me from being baptized?"""
Woweèe a du mcúè, a seesi enáê, “Seèe aè ka' laa seená yi ñger anaè yi m loè ese Nyúè, baná e be bipshi neè seèe enáê, ‘Weèe aè m ka' ba byemi yuu ce e m laèa ka' njoká?’	"They reasoned with themselves, saying, ""If we should say, 'From heaven;' he will say, 'Why then did you not believe him?'"
Tá nfeè' ka' gháá, weèe fa maè'shi tá mntee vi ce bu' weèe tá weèe ce kwaè'shi ená weèe be duè laèa wee ká lá ka',	Settle it therefore in your hearts not to meditate beforehand how to answer,
Weèe aè ka' riñ wa'a, baná weèe be túr ndeèe ce beèe Tata Jisoès a ba túr, geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá, keèr rïìñ buu ce yu vi Nyúè goèr.	that you may walk worthily of the Lord, to please him in all respects, bearing fruit in every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God;
ker loo neè máè ená Nyúè fa máè blaèa ce vi yu yáánïì aè nfeè' ce m ka' ce suñ beèe buu ce aède' beèe aè m ba riñ ka' kuu nsuñ mboèñmboñ. Loo neè ená m ka' ce suñ beèe buu ca, m suñ neè ñger-ñwáè.	on my behalf, that utterance may be given to me in opening my mouth, to make known with boldness the mystery of the Good News,
Kuushi neè ená ñwáè ce e ka' bye múcaèr baná ñgaèñ be kep múcaèr, tá ñwáè ce e byeè goèr kep goèr.	Remember this: he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly. He who sows bountifully will also reap bountifully.
Ñwáè fa loèr baèa káè bcáâ' bbaa, káè blaba' káè mbaèñ ka', njobeè' yi yu yáánïì ená a la' ñwáè rfaè'.	Take no bag for your journey, neither two coats, nor shoes, nor staff: for the laborer is worthy of his food.
Weèr aè byemi yuu ce wáè geèe na aè bdïì' wááwá ba aè nfeè' wááwá, a ce yoèñshi wáè magoèr seê.	we accept it in all ways and in all places, most excellent Felix, with all thankfulness.
E m yá ce fik aèwaâa nduunjïì, a du a fyá' mbo, a yá yuu mo' mbo caa efa bfuè caè'caè' ka'. E laa neè yi enáê, “AÈde' aè ke yú mbaèñ aè nfeè' moè' ka'.” Ce fik anaè yi ku yopri.	"Seeing a fig tree by the road, he came to it, and found nothing on it but leaves. He said to it, ""Let there be no fruit from you forever!"" Immediately the fig tree withered away."
Ñwáè ce e ka' gee yuu ce yaè Ta ce e yu mbe buèu ce koèñ, baná ñgaèñ yu nfúraè, a ba njar yaè, a ba yaè maê.”	"For whoever does the will of my Father who is in heaven, he is my brother, and sister, and mother."""
Beèe wááwá ce a m ce cu aè rla' Lidaè ba mbo' Sharoèn wááwá, a m yá ye, a beeñger a byemi neè Tata Jisoès.	All who lived at Lydda and in Sharon saw him, and they turned to the Lord.
“Ñwáè moè' aè m ce duè aè rbyeè yïì buu, a ka' ce byeè, ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr aèwaâa nduunjïì, beèe a ka' caèa a nyáñshi neè mkuèu, bsiñ vi vú a ye.	"The farmer went out to sow his seed. As he sowed, some fell along the road, and it was trampled under foot, and the birds of the sky devoured it.
Luke	Luêk	8	6	Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr ba mbenduè ryáá, a ka' fúú, a yopri, njobeè' nshe anaè aè m ba ncoèñ se ka'.	Other seed fell on the rock, and as soon as it grew, it withered away, because it had no moisture.
Luke	Luêk	8	7	Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr aè múè msini, a ka' kuè' aè múè mo, msini mi kur.	Other fell amid the thorns, and the thorns grew with it, and choked it.
Luke	Luêk	8	8	Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr yi ba mbe nshe yïû mboèñmboñ, a fúú, a ku' boèñboñ, mbúè yuu wááwá ce a m byeè aè geèe moè' rjeèe.” Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca mïìsi, a waa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	Other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit one hundred times. As he said these things, he called out, ""He who has ears to hear, let him hear!"""
Ñwáè ce e m yá buu ca a ñwáè ce e suñ vi. Yuu ce e laèa yi yu mini. Ye ye rïìñ foñ ená yuu ce e ce laèa yi yu mini. E ce suñ weèe buu ca tá weèe bo byemi foñ.	He who has seen has testified, and his testimony is true. He knows that he tells the truth, that you may believe.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe mo' a fa máè njep ñkaèa, a torsi njïû aè wenduè a suusi njepmbeè, máè cañ a duê.	Through a window I was let down in a basket by the wall, and escaped his hands.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ba btu embe cor a m cute, tá a bo seèesi yuu ce a be geèe.	The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter.
Weèe ka' ce fa yuu neè beèe ce a buu, weèe fa maè'shi tá ye bo ñkoèp yi riñ yuu ce ye bo maè' yi ce geèe ka',	But when you do merciful deeds, don't let your left hand know what your right hand does,
Mñwaè' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè wááwá ba ñwaè' mncir vi m suñ aèmboè buu ce vi be ka' ba caar a ba' aè nfeè' yïì Joân.	For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
Weèe aè rïìñ boèñboñ ená noèñ ce Tata Jisoès be vúè yi be keè ba aèmboè nyáèá ce e ke búèú ñwáè neètú' naè.	For you yourselves know well that the day of the Lord comes like a thief in the night.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ca a m ku ce suñ neè ñger-ñwáè aèmboè nfúú efa rkwe Tata Jisoès. Nyúè aè m geèe woweèe wááwá a túr ntee boèñboñ a waâp mú.	With great power, the apostles gave their testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus. Great grace was on them all.
Nyúè aè fa beèe embe cor bfee jáá jáèá jáá ená a gee rfaè' aègho. Rfaè' entombïì ce e fa neè beèe mo' li yu ená woweèe a ba ñgaâa ntuu Jisos Kraêis, lïì embenjïì li ba ená beèe mo' a ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè. Lïì embenjïì mo li ba ená beèe mo' a yá'ni vi blaèa neè beèe, rmo' li ba ená beèe mo' a gee buu bbáèá, rmo' li ba ená beèe mo' a gee tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se, rmo' li ba ená beèe mo' a ja' beèe, rmo' li ba ená beèe mo' a sa' beèe, rmo' li ba ená beèe mo' a laa bli ce woweèe a m be yá'ni ka'.	God has set some in the assembly: first apostles, second prophets, third teachers, then miracle workers, then gifts of healings, helps, governments, and various kinds of languages.
Woowèe a be kù dù, kaʼ àyàŋsè.	They will go, even tomorrow.
Rbyemïì yu ba ená ká? Rbyemïì yu ená seèe aè rïìñ rara ená yuu ce seèe ce keè', seèe be koni. Rbyemïì yu ba ená seèe aè rïìñ ená yuu yi yu aègho neè mini-ñwáè, a ka' be yá yuu anaè neè mmir ka'.	Now faith is assurance of things hoped for, proof of things not seen.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca wa'a, njeñwáè moè' aè laa efa múè ku' beèe ca enáê, “Rboâñtu li yu neè ñwáè ce e m bi wáè, a nyoñsi wáè.”	"It came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman out of the multitude lifted up her voice, and said to him, ""Blessed is the womb that bore you, and the breasts which nursed you!"""
Weèe aè ka' niñ aè rla', káè yu ba lïû fá, a ka' tá koni weèe ka', weèe du aè btase aè múè mla' anaè laa enáê,	But into whatever city you enter, and they don't receive you, go out into its streets and say,
Pitaè ba Joân a ka' kuè bii ce laèa neè beèe, ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Ndap Nyúè, ker ba beèe Saduèsïî, a vúseè.	As they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees came to them,
tá m bo yá máná aède' m gee yaè beèe aè ko'ndoñ tá beèe mo' efa woweèe a bo luèñ lá.	if by any means I may provoke to jealousy those who are my flesh, and may save some of them.
Wèr à kaʼ ce làa waʼa e ku tose àcùu anà.	As we were talking, he just appeared at that moment.
Ka' nyúè'tu ce yi yu mbe weâe tuè áè, e beè' yi wááwá. Baná weèe fa wáp ka' njobeè' weèe luèu ntaa aè bsii Nyúè, a caa bbe' aèñgoo.	But the very hairs of your head are all numbered. Therefore don't be afraid. You are of more value than many sparrows.
Jisoès aè m ker niñ mbe ndap rloo. Ñwáè moè' aè m ba mbo ce li rkoo li m kwe.	He entered again into the synagogue, and there was a man there who had his hand withered.
A mbuèu ce máè ba kwa'shi máná máè ghááte aè rvúè yá wáè ka'. Kuè laèa ba mbúè nlaèa moè'sir tá yaè ñwáè rfaè' ke'se.	Therefore I didn't even think myself worthy to come to you; but say the word, and my servant will be healed.
“Wáè ka' ba Muu Nyúè, aè nyáá ka embe na cáá aè nsheè, njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Nyúè be laèa tá vi bcïìndap a ke'ni wáè, yaè wáè mbe mmboè faè dïì' aè láá yo kuèu aè luèr ka'.’ ”	"and said to him, ""If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down, for it is written, 'He will put his angels in charge of you.' and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, so that you don't dash your foot against a stone.'"""
Yu' neè, bfúr wa ce máè koèñ seê, mboè Nyúè aè m ce ñgaâa fuèp enjep ñgoèñ na ená woweèe a byemi neè Jisos Kraêis, koni sá' goèr, ye bti' embe dïû' kúú Nyúè ce e m kaè' neè beèe ce a koèñ ye a?	Listen, my beloved brothers. Didn't God choose those who are poor in this world to be rich in faith, and heirs of the Kingdom which he promised to those who love him?
Fa geèe tá ntee yi yañ Yú' Rara ce yu Yú' Nyúè naè ka'. Nyúè aè fa yi neè weèe aèmboè ncoèo, yi ce duèñshi ená be ba aè noèñ mo' tá Nyúè tee weèe efa ñgá'.	Don't grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.
E m fúú efa waâp mú a du mbe dïì' ce ñwáè aè m ka' ba ma' luèr e ku ba', a gú'shi neè mñkúúshi, a gee rloo, a laa enáê,	He was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw, and he knelt down and prayed,
Beèe wááwá a m báèáñger seê, aè ryá ku' ñger Nyúè ca. Woweèe a ka' ce báèáñger wa'a, Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê,	They were all astonished at the majesty of God. But while all were marveling at all the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples,
Mnoèñ ce a be ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap vi ka' báti ntuunfu, Jisoès aè natïì a du aè rla' Bátanïì. Rla' Bátanïì ca yu faèdïì' ce Lasoèroès ce Jisoès aè m fúr efa rkwe naè aè m ce cu.	Then six days before the Passover, Jesus came to Bethany, where Lazarus was, who had been dead, whom he raised from the dead.
Muu wàa ku nyòo nyòo.	My child is emaciating continuously.
Vi bcáè' vi beetïì bbúú, a ce laè'ñger seê, a fúp ce aède' ñwáè aè m ba su'si vi fúp wa' ka'.	His clothing became glistening, exceedingly white, like snow, such as no launderer on earth can whiten them.
Woweèe wááwá a ye a yu'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a baashïì bbábá' ce vi m báti, vi ruu aè mñkaèa ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	They all ate, and were filled. They took up twelve baskets full of that which remained left over from the broken pieces.
E m ce buu ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a jaèasi a lor aè yuu cicïì, tá e bo suèusi mkwaè'shïì ce beèe a túr aè buu wááwá ce a kwaè'shi ená vi yu btatap se naè njep nsheè.	and God chose the lowly things of the world, and the things that are despised, and the things that are not, that he might bring to nothing the things that are:
Ñwáè bsaèrbuu anaè be vúè neè ñger ce yi loè ese Sataèn, geèe ku' mncoèo ba buu bbáèá ce bo' beèe aègho ená a ku'si ye.	even he whose coming is according to the working of Satan with all power and signs and lying wonders,
Seèe aè ka' ba boo baná seèe yu beèe ce seèe be ye bti'. Seèe yu ñgaâa ye bti' Nyúè. Seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe be ye bti' anaè aèbee. Seèe ka' yá ñgá' seèe Jisoès weèe baná seèe woweèe be keè sa' foèo.	and if children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer with him, that we may also be glorified with him.
Yuu anaè yi yu ená beèe enje jáá a be koni bghoènïì ce Jus a koni naè foñ. Woweèe foñ a yu ñgúè' moè' efa nyor Jisos Kraêis. Woweèe a be koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè yïì beèe ce a yu aèbee a Jisos Kraâis weèe. Yuu ce yi geèe beèe aè ka' riñ buu ca yu Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisos Kraêis.	that the Gentiles are fellow heirs, and fellow members of the body, and fellow partakers of his promise in Christ Jesus through the Good News,
Bfeè' vi ka' caâa bbaa, Poshoè Fástoès aè lor dïû' Fálïìs, a ba aè govanoè. Fálïìs aè m ce koèñ ená e gee tá nyor boñ Juês. E ka' koèñ wa'a, a ku lá Pol mbe shañ.	But when two years were fulfilled, Felix was succeeded by Porcius Festus, and desiring to gain favor with the Jews, Felix left Paul in bonds.
Rkòŋnì a yuu entòmbì enjep ŋgòŋ na.	Love is the first thing in this world.
Tata aè ka' yá ye, nse yi koo ye neè ye seê, e laa enáê, “Fa war ka'.”	"When the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said to her, ""Don't cry."""
M ce koèñ aè ryá weèe seê, tá m bo koni bghoènïì ce aè yú', táá tatap.	For I long to see you, that I may impart to you some spiritual gift, to the end that you may be established;
aè ba ye ce e geèe ndap anaè aè táá yáánïì, a ku', a ba ndap nrara.	in whom the whole building, fitted together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord;
Weèr túr ntee njep weèe seê, a riñ neè mini-ñwáè ená aèmboè weèe ce yá ñgá' aèmboè wer weèr ce yá na, weèe be koni ñger ce weèr aè koni foñ naè ese Nyúè.	Our hope for you is steadfast, knowing that, since you are partakers of the sufferings, so also are you of the comfort.
Fyá' neè ma mmbo ba ma mkuèu tá weèe bo rïìñ ená ku ba máè seeseê. Joèo neè máè, fyá' máè, njobeè' nyir e ke túr nyaèa nyor ba bvúp aèmboè weèe aè yá máè túr na ka'.”	"See my hands and my feet, that it is truly me. Touch me and see, for a spirit doesn't have flesh and bones, as you see that I have."""
Nfò à ba tòo bo zhi bubrè mbe dìʼ.	Nfor burnt his hand and it got swollen on the spot.
Ñwáè e ke laè' rkwe, baná beèe a be yá ená ñgaèñ aè kwe wáá tá a ka' geèe buu ce ñwáè anaè aè m laèa.	For where a last will and testament is, there must of necessity be the death of him who made it.
A m̀ lɛɛsi ye tɛ muu kaʼ fʉʉ.	She had her baby through an operation.
E beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Kúti neè du suñ Joân buu ce weèe aè yá a ker yu'. Beèe ce a feèp a ce yá buu, mntáèñ a ce jáèshi yáánïì, ñgaâa msaèasïì a ce ke'seè, ce ba brara, mnfuñ-tuè' a ce yu' buu, beèe ce a m kweñger a ce kúti bteèe, ñgaâa fuèp a ce suñ Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ.	"Jesus answered them, ""Go and tell John the things which you have seen and heard: that the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them."
A láè njaèa njep mbuèu ce wáá. Ce ce yi ka' tá yú boèñboñ ka', baná a be gwaèr, maè' njep mor.”	"Even now the axe also lies at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore that doesn't bring forth good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire."""
Beèe Farïìsi mo' a ku vú aè nfeè' anaè a yá Jisoès a laa neè ye enáê, “Loâ aèfa du aè dïû' jáá njobeè' ñkúú Hároèd ce taè' aè ryú wáè.”	"On that same day, some Pharisees came, saying to him, ""Get out of here, and go away, for Herod wants to kill you."""
AÈ be kashi buu ca aèmboè a ke kashi cáè' naè. Vi be kupse aèmboè cáè' yi ke kwe ncoèo, kupse naè. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè wáè, aè be kupse ka', aède' aè ke kwe ka'.”	"As a mantle, you will roll them up, and they will be changed; but you are the same. Your years will not fail."""
Jisoès aè m laèa cena wa'a, a ce laèa ba aèmboè Yú' ce beèe ce a byemi neè ye a be koni. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, beèe a be koni Yú' anaè ka', njobeè' Nyúè aè m bii ka' kuè'si Jisoès.	But he said this about the Spirit, which those believing in him were to receive. For the Holy Spirit was not yet given, because Jesus wasn't yet glorified.
E m laèa neè máè enáê, “Fa súèti blaèa ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè na ese beèe ka'. Geèe tá beèe wááwá a yu', njobeè' nfeè' ce buu ca be koni yu aètútú.	"He said to me, ""Don't seal up the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is at hand."
Ka' yi yu wa'a, m be fúú efa rkwe duè aè ñgoâñ Galeèle tá weèe vú koni máè aèfo.”	"But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee."""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná, mbúè kwaa aè ka' tá gweè aè nsheè kwe ka', baná e be kuè cu moè'sir aèmboè e m ba. E ka' gwe aè nsheè, rlir li fúú, kwaa kwe, baná e be kuè', geèe mbúè kwaa aèñgoo.	Most certainly I tell you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the earth and dies, it remains by itself alone. But if it dies, it bears much fruit.
Pol aè ka' laèa buu ca neè woweèe mïìsi, a lor bráêd, a loo a yoñshi Nyúè aè waâp bsii, a bá' a ká' a ce ye.	When he had said this, and had taken bread, he gave thanks to God in the presence of all, and he broke it, and began to eat.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ndap ca aè luèñ ntïìni njobeè' ñwáè ca ye ye yu muu Abraèham foñ.	"Jesus said to him, ""Today, salvation has come to this house, because he also is a son of Abraham."
Ŋkar yàa à nyɛɛ mbekì.	My friend jumped up.
Yi m ba ba aè ndeèe neè woweèe ce woweèe a m ka' ba riñ nduunjïû yáánïì ka', neè yïì ce ená woweèe a riñ nduunjïì anaè wáá, keèr loè borni efa rláè mncir ce Jisoès aè m fa neè woweèe.	For it would be better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than, after knowing it, to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to them.
Mbàp yu mbà to.	The rat is down in the hole.
Seèe ka' laa ená seèe aè geèe yuu bebep ka', baná seèe ce loèr Nyúè aè ñwáè mnde', a buu yi nlaèa.	If we say that we haven't sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.
Túè' aè ka' raa, bleebeèe efa múè Juês, ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a cuteè mbe kansuèr, a lor Jisoès a vú aègho mbo, a laa neè ye enáê,	As soon as it was day, the assembly of the elders of the people was gathered together, both chief priests and scribes, and they led him away into their council, saying,
Beèe Saduèsi ce a kani ená aède' ñwáè kwe ker fúú efa rkwe ka' a vú a bipshi neè Jisoès enáê,	There came to him Sadducees, who say that there is no resurrection. They asked him, saying,
Mmbañruè ce a m ye byee anaè a m ba beèe ncúèkïì taê.	Those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.
Joân a ñwáè ce e m suñ beèe aèmboè ye. E m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ce máè m suñ weèe ená e bii ka' vúè naè. Máè m suñ weèe ená nta' ñwáè anaè yi caèa ya, njobeè' tá a ka' keè bi máè, e m ku ba.”	"John testified about him. He cried out, saying, ""This was he of whom I said, 'He who comes after me has surpassed me, for he was before me.'"""
Wèr tʉr nfèʼ à rbàashi nsuu kaʼ, wer be kù fàʼ zhi àlɛŋ.	We donʼt have the time to make ridges on this farm, we will just till it without ridges.
E ba aè nfeè' ce yuu ce wáè byeè anaè yi fúú, a ku', yi ba jáá efa ñgúè yuu ce wáè byeè, káè yu ñgúè kwaa áè, káè ñgúè ká áè.	That which you sow, you don't sow the body that will be, but a bare grain, maybe of wheat, or of some other kind.
A mbuèu ce wer ke loo neè weèe aè nfeè' wááwá ená Nyúè gee tá weèe cu njáèá rcu ce e koèñ ená yïì beèe a cu. Tá yïìseèe Nyúè gee aè yi ñger tá buu bboèñboñ ce weèe ce kwaè'shi aè rgeèe vi geetïî, ker gee tá mfaè' ce weèe ce geèe njo' le rbyemïì mi geetïî.	To this end we also pray always for you, that our God may count you worthy of your calling, and fulfill every desire of goodness and work of faith, with power;
A m be Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aè ñkaè' ca foñ.	Jesus also was invited, with his disciples, to the marriage.
Beèe a be keè ce ye mcúè mbe btu beèe moè', ce geèe buu aèwaèa, ce naèa nyor, koèñ aè rye ñgoèñ, keè' koèñ Nyúè ka'.	traitors, headstrong, conceited, lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God;
“Weèe aè ka' niñ aè rla' rgoèr, káè aè rla' rká' áè, weèe fyá' ñwáè ce e yu ñwáè nyáánïì aèfo, cu weèe ñwáè anaè weèe caar tá yeè nfeè' ce weèe be loâ aè rla' anaè du gháá.”	Into whatever city or village you enter, find out who in it is worthy; and stay there until you go on.
Beèe ce a m láè nsuu neè woweèe na, a ka' yá ye, a laa fa waâp mú enáê, ‘A ñwáè ce e be ye bti' na. Seèe koo yú, tá vi bti' vi bo ba viseèe.’	But those farmers said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.'
E ka' kuè bii mïìsi efa cuèu, Judaès ce e m ba moè' efa beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè- rrúèú, aè toseè. E m ba a ku' beèe ce beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba bleebeèe a m tuu. Woweèe a m túr bsaè' ba mmbaèñ.	While he was still speaking, behold, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs, from the chief priest and elders of the people.
Ñwáè nsuu aè laa seè'ni enáê, ‘M be geèe máká? M be tuu muu waè ce máè koèñ se na. Seemoè' woweèe a be yu'ni neè ye.’	The lord of the vineyard said, 'What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. It may be that seeing him, they will respect him.'
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce laèa neè weèe seè'ni na ená ñwáè ce e ka' túr posaè káè baèa áè, e loêr. Ñwáè aè ka' tá túr kaèafaè' ka', ñgaèñ fyenïì yi cáè', yuu yïì.	"Then he said to them, ""But now, whoever has a purse, let him take it, and likewise a wallet. Whoever has none, let him sell his cloak, and buy a sword."
Máè ka' cu mbe tunshe na m gee rfaè' ce li be jaè' beèe. Yi ka' ba wa' máè ke' riñ yïì ce m co' ka'.	But if I live on in the flesh, this will bring fruit from my work; yet I don't know what I will choose.
Seèe ka' táá tatap du ba' aèlúèsimbuèu, seèe Jisoès weèe ke sa' aèbee. Seèe ka' kani ye, ye ye ke kani seèe.	If we endure, we will also reign with him. If we deny him, he also will deny us.
Hároèd aè ka' roèo ye yá ka', a bipshi neè bsoogáè ce a m ce keè'ni ye naè. E ka' bipshi riñ dïì' e yu ka', a laa ená a yúshi woweèe. E ka' laèa wa'a, a natïû aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a du aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, a cu aèfo.	When Herod had sought for him, and didn't find him, he examined the guards, and commanded that they should be put to death. He went down from Judea to Caesarea, and stayed there.
Woweèe a m laèa wa'a njobeè' a m yá Troâfimoès ce aè rla' Áfásoès a Pol weèe aè rla' anaè, a ce kwaè'shi ená Pol aè m loèr ye a du aègho mbe Ndaèp Nyúè.	For they had seen Trophimus, the Ephesian, with him in the city, and they supposed that Paul had brought him into the temple.
Woweèe a kútïì a beesi enáê, “Weèr rïìñ ka'.”	They answered that they didn't know where it was from.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè nye byee ce beèe a ce geèe tañshïì aègho neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na naè, seèe aè rïìñ ená njáèá mnyúè anaè yu buu bcicïì njobeè' vi túr myoèñ ka'. Seèe rïìñ yiseèe ená Nyúè ku ba moè'sir caè'caè'.	Therefore concerning the eating of things sacrificed to idols, we know that no idol is anything in the world, and that there is no other God but one.
Yi yu foñ ená ñwáè aè ka' no mruè' ce mi koo, e ker koñ aè rno msáâñ mruè' ka' njobeè' e ka' no baná e be laèa enáê, ‘Mruè' ce mi koo mi yu aèndeèe neè msáâñ mruè'.’ ”	"No man having drunk old wine immediately desires new, for he says, 'The old is better.'"""
A mbuèu ce máè m sañ ñwaè' anaè neè weèe, faè dïì' m ka' vú ca'ni weèe tá yi lo ba ená beèe ce m ce kwaè'shi máná woweèe a ba geèe nyor boñ máè, a lo ba ba beèe ce a be geèe tá m lo yu' ba ryañ ka'. M rïìñ máná m ka' ce yu' rboèñ baná weèe ce yu' rboèñ foñ.	And I wrote this very thing to you, so that, when I came, I wouldn't have sorrow from them of whom I ought to rejoice; having confidence in you all, that my joy would be shared by all of you.
Seèe ce seèe túr yuu boèñboñ ca, seèe yu aèmboè mkïìñ nshe. Seèe yu wa'a tá yi bo duèñshi ená njáèá ñger ce yi caèa ñger na, yu yiseèe ñger ka'. Ñger anaè yu ba ñger Nyúè.	But we have this treasure in clay vessels, that the exceeding greatness of the power may be of God, and not from ourselves.
Pailáèt aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñkúú Jus a?” Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ laèa wáè wa'a.”	"Pilate asked him, ""Are you the King of the Jews?"" He answered him, ""So you say."""
Bsoogáè vïû govanoè, a lor Jisoès a du aègho mbe dïì' mnsa' embe nto' ce govanoè aè m ce cu mbo, bár bsoogáè wááwá a niñ mbo, a sir ye a tarte,	Then the governor's soldiers took Jesus into the Praetorium, and gathered the whole garrison together against him.
Woweèe a ka' cu aèfo aè mú nfeè' moè', bfúr a daasïì woweèe ená woweèe a du boèñboñ, du yá beèe ce a m tuu woweèe.	After they had spent some time there, they were sent back with greetings from the brothers to the apostles.
Kù gee nè nè yee bo.	Just do it yourselves.
M ̀ be diʼ vʉ̌ mbenjì.	I will come afterwards.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ye yaè nyor, ker no wa bláá baná ñgaèñ be cu njep máè tá má máè cu njep ye.	He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood lives in me, and I in him.
Njeèndoñ anaè aè ka' laèa wa'a, mbeèñ aè bapñgeèr, a rúúñger, a wañger, nshe aè ci'tïì. Ká' embe nfeè' ce beèe a m káè' ba njep ñgoèñ na, ñgoèñ yi m be ci'ti wa' ka'.	There were lightnings, sounds, and thunders; and there was a great earthquake, such as was not since there were men on the earth, so great an earthquake, so mighty.
Baná seèe gee buu bbebep tá rboèñ li bo fúú enjo a? Beèe moè' a ce bepsi la rlii, a ce laèa ená máè laèa lá wa'a. Nyúè be fa njáèá beèe ca ñgá' ce e be ghááte aè yuu ce woweèe a laèa.	"Why not (as we are slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say), ""Let us do evil, that good may come?"" Those who say so are justly condemned."
Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e be fyeèni máè ce yeñger weèr ye mbe tábuèr na.	But behold, the hand of him who betrays me is with me on the table.
Bbyeèñgeê, yu'ni neè neè bduu wee aèmboè weèe ce yu'ni neè Tata Jisoès naè.	Wives, be subject to your own husbands, as to the Lord.
Máè ka' laa aèmboè máè laèa na, m ku riñ máná weèe aè geèe yáánïì seê, aè rjaè' máè seè'ni ce m yu aè ñgá' na.	However you did well that you shared in my affliction.
Weèr aè m ka' baè koèñ weèe wa'a, a ke' koñ ená weèr ku suñ weèe ba Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce e loè ese Nyúè ka', weèr aè m koèñ aè rfa wer mnyor neè weèe foñ, njobeè' weèr aè m koèñ weèe seê.	Even so, affectionately longing for you, we were well pleased to impart to you, not the Good News of God only, but also our own souls, because you had become very dear to us.
Beèe ce a m túr ñkwaèa ca a ka' yá ená njïì moè' ker ba aègho neè woweèe aè rkap mbaèa ka', woweèe a koo Pol ba Silaès a súñ a du aègho aè ntaa, a fa woweèe neè ñgaâa sa' to'.	But when her masters saw that the hope of their gain was gone, they seized Paul and Silas, and dragged them into the marketplace before the rulers.
E zhɛ̀ɛ mbàa a lop mɛ̀ àgho.	He has stolen money and tricked me with it.
Weèe ce loo neè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá. Wee loo, weèe ce kwa'shi ba aè yuu ce weèe ce loo anaè, ce yoñshi ye aè buu wááwá ce e geèe neè weèe.	Continue steadfastly in prayer, watching therein with thanksgiving;
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa keè'ni Ndap Nyúè naè, ker ba yïì beèe, a m duè a vú neè woweèe. A m koo woweèe aè ñger ka', njobeè' ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a m ce wáp ená a ka' koo woweèe aè ñger, seemoè' beèe a túúshïì woweèe neè bluèr.	Then the captain went with the officers, and brought them without violence, for they were afraid that the people might stone them.
laa neè ñwáè ndap enáê, ‘Ñwáè ryá'nïì aè laèa ená weèr bipshi neè wáè ená dïì' ce e be ye byee Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap mbo a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe yu ba fá lá?’	"Tell the master of the house, 'The Teacher says to you, ""Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?""'"
maè' njep mor ce beèe a be keèe ce warse ce kúr msoèñ njo.	and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
E ke fa seèe ñger aè nfeè' wááwá ce seèe ka' ce yá ñgá'. E ke geèe wa'a ená ñwáè moè' foñ aè ka' ce yá ñgá', seèe bo fa ñgaèñ ñger neè ñger ce seèe aè koni ese ye.	who comforts us in all our affliction, that we may be able to comfort those who are in any affliction, through the comfort with which we ourselves are comforted by God.
Njemor yi tar mbe dïì' Nyúè anaè. Njemor anaè yi m vúè ese ñger ker ba foèo Nyúè. Ñwáè moè' aè m ba ce aède' e m ba du mbe dïì' Nyúè anaè ka'. AÈde' ñwáè aè m ba ku du mbo ba aè nfeè' ce mñgá' saèamba ce bcïìndap Nyúè a vúè aègho naè vi mïì.	The temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power. No one was able to enter into the temple, until the seven plagues of the seven angels would be finished.
Weèe yi ená ñwáè ce e m laèa enáê, “Fa koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè' ka',” ku ba ye ce e m laèa foñ enáê, “Fa yú ñwáè ka'.” Wáè ka' tá koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè' ka', yú ñwáè, yi ku ba ená wáè bú' mncir wááwá.	"For he who said, ""Do not commit adultery,"" also said, ""Do not commit murder."" Now if you do not commit adultery, but murder, you have become a transgressor of the law."
Máè m tá baè vúè laèa yuu neè woweèe ka', a m ba taèa woweèe aè yuu bebep ka'. AÈmboè máè vúè seè'ni na, yuu mo' yi yu ce aède' yi ker tá'shi yaèp buu bbebep ka'.	If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin; but now they have no excuse for their sin.
Bsoogáè a ceeshïì bkúè efa keñ ñká', e ce duè mbaè roè.	Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the boat, and let it fall off.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Koèñ Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè neè yo ntee- ñwáè, ba neè lo ryoèñ-ñwáè, ker ba neè wo bfee-ñwáè.	"Jesus said to him, ""'You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your mind.'"
Beèe ce a ce laèa wa'a a geèe yi ba rara ená a roo ba rla' mo' ce be ba rlap.	For those who say such things make it clear that they are seeking a country of their own.
Ncir ca yu ncir ce goèr, aè ba ncir ce entombïì.	This is the first and great commandment.
Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m ko' mbe rtuèu, a ka' baè' mbo a cu aè nsheè.	Jesus went up into the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples.
Woweèe a ka' yu' wa'a, a byemi, a baptïìr woweèe aè rlii Tata Jisoès.	When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
E ji mdip aè mnoèñ mñkyeèe, njeè aè ká' a ce yañ ye.	When he had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was hungry afterward.
Abraèham aè m ba aè nfeè' anaè aèmboè bfeè' rjeèe. E m rïìñ ená e yu gúâú ñwáè, a riñ ená Sáèra yu kar. Ka' e m rïìñ wa'a, e m ku byemi a sá ka'.	Without being weakened in faith, he didn't consider his own body, already having been worn out, (he being about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb.
Ñwáè moè' aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Yoè ma ba bfúr wo a táá njepmbeè a ce koèñ aè ryá wáè.”	"It was told him by some saying, ""Your mother and your brothers stand outside, desiring to see you."""
“Yi ka' ba wa'a, ñkúú Agripaè, máè kani efa rgeèe yuu ce Nyúè aè m suñ máè aè njáèá rlo mo' naè ka'.	"Therefore, King Agrippa, I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	20	Máè m káè' a fe'shi neè beâe aè rla' Daèmaskoès entoèmbïì, a ka' du a fe'shi aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, a ker fe'shi neè beèe enje jáá foñ ená woweèe a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep, kúti aè mbeèp yïì Nyúè, gee buu ce vi ce duèñshi ená woweèe a kupse ghup.	but declared first to them of Damascus, at Jerusalem, and throughout all the country of Judea, and also to the Gentiles, that they should repent and turn to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	21	A mbuèu ce Jus a m koo máè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a ce roèo aè ryú máè.	For this reason the Jews seized me in the temple, and tried to kill me.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	22	Nyúè aè jaè' máè a ba' ntïìni na, máè táá taâa a ce feè'shi neè beâe bká'ká' ba beâe bgoèrgoèr. M ce laèa yuu mo' jáá caa efa yïì ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ba Musïìs a m laèa ená yi be keè ba ka'.	Having therefore obtained the help that is from God, I stand to this day testifying both to small and great, saying nothing but what the prophets and Moses said would happen,
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	26	23	Woweèe a m laèa ená Kraâis anaè be keè yá ñgá', ba ñwáè entoèmbïì aè rfúú efa rkwe, suñ neè yïì beèe ba beèe enje jáá aèmboè rraa ce li raa.”	how the Christ must suffer, and how, by the resurrection of the dead, he would be first to proclaim light both to these people and to the Gentiles."
Nyʉ̀ fɛɛsi ye efa ndò anà.	May God keep him safe from that bad situation.
Ca a zhìi sàʼ.	This is his cutlass.
Yú' anaè ba viseèe mntee a ce duèñshi ená seèe yu boo Nyúè.	The Spirit himself testifies with our spirit that we are children of God;
Ka' bcïìndap Nyúè ce a caèa ñgaâa ryá'nïì ce a yu ñgaâa mnde' naè a ke laèa bebep aèmboè woweèe aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	whereas angels, though greater in might and power, don't bring a railing judgment against them before the Lord.
Máè vúè aè rká' beâe byáánïì ka'. Máè vúè aè rká' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep tá woweèe a bo kupse, maè' yaèp buu bbebep anaè.”	"I have not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."""
Ñwáè nsïìp ce e cu ce keè' ye, ce lá yi ntee rara aèmboè Kraâis ye ye yu nrara naè.	Everyone who has this hope set on him purifies himself, even as he is pure.
Máè ba ba a weâe mú, máè ba rïìñ yuu ce m be laèa. Njáèá yuu ce weèe aè geèe na, yi geèe bfee vi bú máè.	but I could wish to be present with you now, and to change my tone, for I am perplexed about you.
Beèe a m vúè neè ñwáè moè' ce e m feèp, a ba lúr, yú' nyúèrkaè' yi ba njep ye. Jisoès aè gee e ke'seè, a ká' a ce laèa, a ce yá buu foñ.	Then one possessed by a demon, blind and mute, was brought to him and he healed him, so that the blind and mute man both spoke and saw.
Yuu ce ñwáè aè baè'ri ndap anaè aègho yi ka' tá she ka' baná ñgaèñ be koo blaè'.	If any man's work remains which he built on it, he will receive a reward.
M ce geèe yuu boèñboñ ce m ce koèñ aè rgeèe na ka', a ce geèe ba yuu bebep ce m ce koèñ aè rgeèe ka' naè.	For the good which I desire, I don't do; but the evil which I don't desire, that I practice.
Jisoès aè ka' kuè bii ce laèa neè beèe, yïì ma ba bfúr vi a vúê, a táá njepmbeè a ce koèñ aè rlaèa yuu neè ye.	While he was yet speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers stood outside, seeking to speak to him.
E siʼsi mmbo mbe tù.	He has rubbed his hands on the head.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Saèr mbuèu efa ñgaèa ca neè weèr.”	"Peter answered him, ""Explain the parable to us."""
E bipshïì neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Weèe ce sár ba ká weèe woweèe?”	"He asked the scribes, ""What are you asking them?"""
Yi yu foñ ená ku' ñgaâa msaèasïì a m ba aè to' Isráèl aè nfeè' yïì ÁÈleshaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè. Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m geèe moè' efa woweèe aè ke'seè ka'. Ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m geèe e ke'seè aè m ku ba Namaèn ce aè m ba ñwáâ aè to' Sirïìyaè.”	"There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, yet not one of them was cleansed, except Naaman, the Syrian."""
Yi yu ená beèe ce a yu entoèmbïì a be keèe ba elúèsimbuèu, tá beèe ce a yu elúèsimbuèu a ba entombïì.”	"So the last will be first, and the first last. For many are called, but few are chosen."""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yu' wa'a, a bááñger seê, a laa enáê, “Baná ñwáè ce aède' e luêñ, yu ba nda?”	"When the disciples heard it, they were exceedingly astonished, saying, ""Who then can be saved?"""
Beèe ce a m ce keè'ni Jisoès, a m vúèshi ye, a lip ye.	The men who held Jesus mocked him and beat him.
E ka' bipshi wa'a, a fyá' woweèe wááwá a kaari a tarte, a laa neè ñwáè yañ anaè enáê “Maè' lo rkoo kuèyáá.” E gee wa'a, li rkoo li boêñ, a kúti aèmboè li m ba.	"He looked around at them all, and said to the man, ""Stretch out your hand."" He did, and his hand was restored as sound as the other."
Seèe rïìñ ená Nyúè e ke yu' mloo ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep ka'. E ke yu' ba rloo ñwáè nsïìp ce e ke wáp ye, ce geèe yuu ce e koèñ.	We know that God doesn't listen to sinners, but if anyone is a worshipper of God, and does his will, he listens to him.
Pailáèt aè laa neè ye enáê, “Mini anaè yu ká seê?” E ka' laèa wa'a, a ker fúú embe nto' a yá Juês, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè yá yuu bebep moè' ce ñwáè ca aè geèe ka'.	"Pilate said to him, ""What is truth?"" When he had said this, he went out again to the Jews, and said to them, ""I find no basis for a charge against him."
Beèe Farïìsi a m naèti a du a cu mcúè aèmboè a be geèe tá Jisoès ka' faèa nlaèa.	Then the Pharisees went and took counsel how they might entrap him in his talk.
Muu ca à ghaʼ zhì tâa.	This child is stubborn to his father.
E duê, a ka' baè', beèe anaè a koo ye a lïîp, e kútïì mboèmmbo.	They took him, beat him, and sent him away empty.
Beèe ce a m ye leè' ca a m caèa beèe mkyeèe.	There were more than forty people who had made this conspiracy.
Yuu ghagha' ce Jisoès aè m geèe aè rla' Kánaè aè ñgoâñ Galeèle na, aè m ba ncoèo entombïì ce e m duèñshi njáèá foèo ce e túr. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá, a byemi neè ye.	This beginning of his signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and revealed his glory; and his disciples believed in him.
Tata ce seèe ce laèa na yu Yú'. Faè dïì' wááwá ce Yú' Tata yi ka' ba, baná beèe anaè a luèñ.	Now the Lord is the Spirit and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, seèe aè rïîñ, a byemi rkoèñnïì ce Nyúè aè túr neè seèe. Nyúè yu rkoèñnïì. Ñwáè ce e ka' cu njep rkoèñnïì, baná e cu njep Nyúè, Nyúè aè cu njep ye.	We know and have believed the love which God has for us. God is love, and he who remains in love remains in God, and God remains in him.
Wáè ka' ce loo aè njáèá li anaè, ce yoèñshi Nyúè aèmboè ká, aède' yïì anaè yi ja' ñwáè moè' ka'.	For you most certainly give thanks well, but the other person is not built up.
Woweèe a niñ mbe ndaèp, a yá muu a yïì ma ce Máèári, a gú'shi neè ye. A ka' gú'shi neè ye wáá, a mú' waêp bbaèa, a fúr bco' mo' ce a too ená guêl, ba nráèá, ker ba njáèá mgúr mo' ce mi m ce rúèú boèñboñ seê, a fa neè ye.	They came into the house and saw the young child with Mary, his mother, and they fell down and worshiped him. Opening their treasures, they offered to him gifts: gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
Ñwáè wááwá ce e ke koèñ aè rcañ, e ke yá'ni aè rcañ boèñboñ seê. E loè gee wa'a tá e bo koo blaè' ce vi ke cu nfeseè ka'. Blaè' viseèe aè ba blaè' ce vi be cu nfeseè.	Every man who strives in the games exercises self-control in all things. Now they do it to receive a corruptible crown, but we an incorruptible.
Ntee zhi ce yaŋ ye njobèʼ zhìi tâ à lìp ye.	He is angry because his father beat him.
Ŋkàr à niŋ à rkwe Nfò sê.	Many baskets of corn were brought to Nforʼs funeral ceremony.
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe túr njïì bfee aè rkani mncir Nyúè tá weèe bo loèr yeè ndeèe to'.	"He said to them, ""Full well do you reject the commandment of God, that you may keep your tradition."
Nyúè ce e ke fyá' viseèe mntee wááwá rïìñ yuu ce Yú' yi ce kwaè'shi, njobeè' yú' yi ce bu' mmbo aètu beèe Nyúè aè buu ce Nyúè koèñ.	He who searches the hearts knows what is on the Spirit's mind, because he makes intercession for the saints according to God.
Awá Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê “Láè neè ye nyañ. Weèe ce fa ye ñgá' njoká? E geèe ba yuu boèñboñ neè máè.	"But Jesus said, ""Leave her alone. Why do you trouble her? She has done a good work for me."
AÈmboè yi yu wa'a, baná mñgúè' nyor wááwá vi ku ce fa' aèbee njobeè' mñgúè' nyor wááwá ku túr yuu aè rgeèe neè ñgúè' nyor moè'.	that there should be no division in the body, but that the members should have the same care for one another.
Fyá' neè mnyaèabaèraè' mo' tá Pol cu mbo tá weèe lor ye duè aègho boèñboñ duè fa neè Fálïìs ce e yu govanoè.”	He asked them to provide animals, that they might set Paul on one, and bring him safely to Felix the governor.
Jisoès aè joo bo ese ye, tu anaè yi tetïì, e natïì mbekïì, a fár buu neè ye.	He touched her hand, and the fever left her. She got up and served him.
Dávïìd aè m yá yuu ce yi be keè ba, a suñ aèmboè nfúú efa rkwe Kraâis enáê, ‘Nyúè aè m maè'shi ená e cu mbaè yir ka', a ma'shi ená yïì nyor búte ka'.’	he foreseeing this spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that neither was his soul left in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay.
Nfeè' aè m káè' a ce gháá ce a be ye ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap. Beèe a m loâ aè bbu' mla' wááwá a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Woweèe aè m koèñ aè rgeèe wap mnyor tá vi ba brara aè bsii Nyúè, tá nfeè' ñkaè' ka' gháá.	Now the Passover of the Jews was at hand. Many went up from the country to Jerusalem before the Passover, to purify themselves.
Ryoâñ ñwáè li caèa byee, nyor ñwáè aè caa bcáè'.	Life is more than food, and the body is more than clothing.
Nyúè aè m ce koèñ ená m naatu neè ku' buu bbáèá ce e m múè' ma mmir máè yá naè ka'. E m fa máè yuu mo' nje nyoèr, yi ba aèmboè msini wa'a, aè ba yuu ce aè m tuusi Sataèn. Yuu anaè yi m ce yañ máè tá m bo ce naèa tu ka'.	By reason of the exceeding greatness of the revelations, that I should not be exalted excessively, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan to torment me, that I should not be exalted excessively.
E du a ce cu a ñwáè moâ' aè to' anaè, ñwáè anaè aè tuu ye ená e du aè mñkúè du ce nyañ yi ñkuânyaèm.	He went and joined himself to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed pigs.
Yuu ce yi m ba efa rkáè' ce weèr aè yu', a yá neè mer mmir, a ke'shïî, a ker joo neè mer mmbo yu nlaèa ce e ce fa ryoèñ.	That which was from the beginning, that which we have heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that which we saw, and our hands touched, concerning the Word of life
E m yɛ̀ɛ cɛ̌ʼ Nfò a caŋ a du kù Nsòʼ.	He stole Nfor’s clothe and escaped to Nso.
Ca yi be keè koni, tá beèe Isráèl wááwá a luêñ. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e be fúr beèe efa ñgá' be vúè efa rla' Sayoèn, fúr ñgeâe bebep embe ndúè' Jakoèp.	"and so all Israel will be saved. Even as it is written, ""There will come out of Zion the Deliverer, and he will turn away ungodliness from Jacob."
Jisoès aè naa mmir a yá aèmboè ñgaâa mbaèa a ce fa rfa njep ñkuèp rfa embe Ndaèp Nyúè.	He looked up, and saw the rich people who were putting their gifts into the treasury.
E ce laèa ba buu ce e m yá neè mi mmir, a yu' neè vi btuè'. Geewa'a beèe a byemi yuu ce e ce laèa ka'.	What he has seen and heard, of that he testifies; and no one receives his witness.
Yi ka' lo ba ese Nyúè, aède' weèe jepsïì woweèe ka'. Weèe ka' jepsi woweèe, seemoè' yi lo ba ená weèe ce maè' bïìr weèe Nyúè weèe.”	"But if it is of God, you will not be able to overthrow it, and you would be found even to be fighting against God!"""
Beèe mo' a m ce suñ buu aèmboè Ndap Nyúè, a ce laèa ená a baè'ri ndap anaè neè bluâr bboèñboñ, buu ce beèe a m fa neè Nyúè a susi ndap anaè aègho vi boñ foñ seê. Jisoès aè laa enáê,	As some were talking about the temple and how it was decorated with beautiful stones and gifts, he said,
E m ku tañshi ba tañshïì e mo'sir, a gee ená beèe ce e geèe woweèe a ba brara naè a ba byáánïì nfeseè.	For by one offering he has perfected forever those who are being sanctified.
Bfúr waê, weèe aè ka' yá aèmboè ñwáè aè geèe yuu bebep, weèe ce weèe ce geèe buu aè ñger Yú' Nyúè naè, weèe ja' ye tá e bo kúti njep nduunjïû yáánïì. Wee ce jaè' ñwáè anaè, weèe fa ce naèa tu ka'. Weèe fyá' weêe mnyor boèñboñ faè dïì' weèe lo gweè rmoèoshïì foñ ka'.	Brothers, even if a man is caught in some fault, you who are spiritual must restore such a one in a spirit of gentleness; looking to yourself so that you also aren't tempted.
E m fa ye ñgúè' moè' efa ñgoèñ ca káè mú bábá' efa gho ka'. Geewa'a, e m ye leè' ená e be loè fa ñgoèñ anaè neè ye, ker ba boo vi, ka' aè m ba mbe nfeè' anaè e túr muu ka' wa'a.	He gave him no inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on. He promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, when he still had no child.
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a vúê, aè ku ba Jisoès a woweèe, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Weèr aè ba moo aè rfúr yú' anaè laèr njoká?”	"Then the disciples came to Jesus privately, and said, ""Why weren't we able to cast it out?"""
Mo mmir waŋwaŋ, mi nyaa jìʼjìʼ.	Your eyes should be clear, those of the animals should be dark.
AÈde' ñwáè ce e ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ wáp ñwáè ce e ce sa' beèe ka'. Ñwáè ce aède' e wáp ye, yu ba ñwáè ce e ce geèe ñgeâe bebep. Wáè ka' ce koèñ aè rwáp ñwáè ce e ce sa' beèe ka', aè gee ñgeâe boèñboñ tá e bo yoèñshi wáè.	For rulers are not a terror to the good work, but to the evil. Do you desire to have no fear of the authority? Do that which is good, and you will have praise from the same,
Tata aè laa neè ye enáê, “Beèe Farïìsi caê, weâe ke suè'si mndoñ ba bkañ embe nduè, a fyá' weèe enjep mú, wee mntee vi ruu neè mkwaè'shïì ce ená weèe aè ba ce koo buu ese beèe aè ñger, ker ba bsaèrbuu.	"The Lord said to him, ""Now you Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your inward part is full of extortion and wickedness."
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Haba! Weâe beèe e luèuni ce weèe buu rbyemïì! M be cu weèe seèe duè baè' fá? M be kur ntee neè weèe duè baè' fá? Vúè neè muu anaè fa neè máè.”	"He answered him, ""Unbelieving generation, how long shall I be with you? How long shall I bear with you? Bring him to me."""
Rfaè' ce ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ca a ce geèe li táá ba aètu yuu ce yi yu mbe buèu. Seèe rïìñ wa'a njobeè' aè m ba aè nfeè' ce Musïìs aè m ce tami nyor aè rbaè'ri taèp neè bcáè' naè, Nyúè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Loèr nfeè' ba'ri taèp ca tá yi ku ba aèmboè máè m suñ wáè mbe rtuèu Sinaèi ená aè ba'ri naè.”	"who serve a copy and shadow of the heavenly things, even as Moses was warned by God when he was about to make the tabernacle, for he said, ""See, you shall make everything according to the pattern that was shown to you on the mountain."""
E ka' tose, a ko'shi aègee Jisoès, a laa neè ye enáê, “Máè caè'ni wáè, Rabaèi.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a baa ye nje nyoèr.	"Immediately he came to Jesus, and said, ""Hail, Rabbi!"" and kissed him."
Rlaa rli yû?	Have you finished eating the kola?
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Yu' neè, m ce láè luèr rbuu ndap aè rla' Sayoèn. AÈ co' máè luèr anaè, e boñ neè máè seê. Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè ye, aède' rïìtu yi ke koo ñgaèñ ka'.”	"Because it is contained in Scripture, ""Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone, chosen, and precious: He who believes in him will not be disappointed."""
E ker fa ye ŋguu moʼ.	He has again given him some firewood.
Yi m ba ená e be kwe ba aètu to' ca caè'caè' ka'. Yi m ba ená e be kwe aètu beèe Nyúè ce a yu aè bto' wááwá tá e bo vúè neè woweèe aèbee tá woweèe a ba ñwáè moè'sir.	and not for the nation only, but that he might also gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad.
Bfúr waê, káâ' aè nfeè' weèr aè m vúè ca'ni weèe, seèe aè lo a gaèpni naè, nfeè' aè be du se ka. Seèe aè m gaèpni ba enjep ntee ka, seèe aè m ku gapni ba efa nyoèr. Weèr aè canïì efa ryá weèe, a ce koèñ se ená weèr aè ba vúè tá seèe ker yáni.	But we, brothers, being bereaved of you for a short season, in presence, not in heart, tried even harder to see your face with great desire,
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce a m baèptir weèe, yi duñshïì ená a tuñ weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aèbee. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè foñ Nyúè aè fúr weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe efa rkwe. E m geèe wa'a njobeè' weèe aè m byemi ená Nyúè ce e m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe, túr ñger aè rfúr weèe efa rkwe foñ.	having been buried with him in baptism, in which you were also raised with him through faith in the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
Mboè a wáè ñwáâ aè to' Ijïìp ce e m káè' ñgá', a lor ñgaâa nyúshi beèe ncúèkïì kyeèe aè nfeè' moè' a du aègho aè ntee rïìñ naè a?”	"Aren't you then the Egyptian, who before these days stirred up to sedition and led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?"""
Njáèá beèe ce a maè'shi nduunjïû yáánïì na a yu aèmboè mntoèñ mdip ce vi yuushi wa'a, a ker ba aèmboè mmbaè' ce fu' yi ke caèa, lor naè. Nyúè aè kupshi dïì' mo' neè woweèe; faè dïì' anaè aè ku ba ba túè'nji.	These are wells without water, clouds driven by a storm; for whom the blackness of darkness has been reserved forever.
Nfèʼ yu kɛ sèʼni?	What is the time now?
Geewa'a, ñwáè aè ka' bepsi rlii Yú' Rara, aède' Nyúè ke foosi ye ka'. Ñgaèñ be niñ aè mnsa' njo' yi yuu bebep, nfeseè.”	"but whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit never has forgiveness, but is guilty of an eternal sin"""
Fyɛʼ kù cùu mo, à ku yɛ ye.	Look at its front (lit.
Jisoès aè karsïì nyor a lapni woweèe,	"But he turned and rebuked them, ""You don't know of what kind of spirit you are."
Joân aè m yar bcáè' ce a m ba' neè mnyoâr kaèmáêl, a cúú ñguèp nyaèa njep mbuèu. Vi byee aè ba mñguu ba bluè.	John was clothed with camel's hair and a leather belt around his waist. He ate locusts and wild honey.
Ka' aèmboè weèr aè yá ñwáè ka' na, weèr aè yá Jisoès. AÈ m ba aè mú nfeè' moè' Nyúè aè gee nta' Jisoès yi sáteè embe nta' bcïìndap Nyúè. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' ñgá' ce Jisoès aè m yá, a kwe, Nyúè aè lo a fa ye nta' kúú, a gee ená beèe a yu'ni neè ye. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Nyúè aè m túr ntee boèñboñ, yi ba ená Jisoès aè kwe aètu beèe wááwá.	But we see him who has been made a little lower than the angels, Jesus, because of the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that by the grace of God he should taste of death for everyone.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “M rïìñ máná weèe be maè' ñgaèa ca neè máè, ‘Ñwáè mcáèp báèá mo mcáèp luêñ. Geèe laè njáèá buu ce weèr aè m yu' ená wáè m geèe aè rla' Kaèpanuèm naè fa wáâ laè' na foñ.’ ”	"He said to them, ""Doubtless you will tell me this parable, 'Physician, heal yourself! Whatever we have heard done at Capernaum, do also here in your hometown.'"""
a ka' gee yuu anaè neè seèe aè njïì ce aède' ñwáè laa ka'. E m túr bfee, a riñ buu wááwá, a ka' gee wa'a.	which he made to abound toward us in all wisdom and prudence,
M ce kwaè'shi ená dïì' ce Nyúè aè fa neè weèr ce weèr yu ñgaâa ntuu, yu dïì' elúèsimbuèu. Weèr yu aèmboè beèe ce mnsa' mi koo woweèe, yi ka' táá seè'ni ená a be yú woweèe, a lor woweèe a tár aèwañ tá bcïìndap Nyúè ba beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a bo kaari ce fyá'.	For, I think that God has displayed us, the apostles, last of all, like men sentenced to death. For we are made a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men.
A tɛɛ nè ye a zhʉ.	They went as far as killing him.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa blaèa ca, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè Jus a ká' a ce kwaè'shi jáá jáèá jáá njo' blaèa anaè.	Therefore a division arose again among the Jews because of these words.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, seèe laa neè woweèe ená a fa keèr laèa yuu mo' neè ñwáè moè' aè rlii Jisoès ka', faè dïì' ryá'nïì ca li bo keèr duè ntombïì ka'.”	"But so that this spreads no further among the people, let's threaten them, that from now on they don't speak to anyone in this name."""
Túè' aè ka' keèr raa, Joân aè táá a beèe a mmbaa ce e m ce yá'ni woweèe.	Again, the next day, John was standing with two of his disciples,
Bfúr waê, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, yi yu rara ená m ker bii feè'shi ená beèe ce a byemi neè Jisos Kraâis a gee búè ka'. Máè ka' ba ce feè'shi wa'a, beèe a ba keèr ce fa máè ñgá' ka'. Yi ka' ba ba mini wa'a, yuu ce m ce feè'shi ená Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa na yi ba geèe tá beèe a bepsi ntee neè máè ka'.	But I, brothers, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling block of the cross has been removed.
AÈmboè weèr ce cu neè nyor ca njep ñgoèñ na, weèr ce cu ba njobeè' weèr aè láè ntee neè ye, ke' ba njobeè' weèr aè yá ye ka'.	for we walk by faith, not by sight.
E ke taŋshi nlàa lùprì lùprì àmbò nzhɛ̀ɛ waʼa.	He speaks too fast like a thief.
Weèr aè m niñ mbe keñ ñgoèr ce aè m ba yïû aè dïì' ce a m ce too ená AÈdamituèm. Keñ anaè aè m táá aè rco'ti duè, ce táátá aè mla' moâ' aèwaâa roè aè ñgoâñ Áshaè. Weèr aè niñ mbo a ce duè. AÈristakoès ce aè m ba ñwáâ aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaâ aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè aè m ba weèr woweèe.	Embarking in a ship of Adramyttium, which was about to sail to places on the coast of Asia, we put to sea; Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
E ce lìp bèe ànfor.	He is beating people indiscriminately.
Ñgá' ce woweèe a m yá, aè m moèoshi woweèe seê. Geewa'a woweèe a m ce lu'shi seê, a ba mmbo mtoo seê, ka' fuèp aè m koo woweèe se wa'a.	how that in much proof of affliction the abundance of their joy and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality.
Weèr ce jepsi ñwáè moè' ka', faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo laèa yuu mo' bebep aèmboè ler rfaè' ka'.	We give no occasion of stumbling in anything, that our service may not be blamed,
Muu à bɛr njàp tɛ e bo lò ye nè mootì.	The child has kept some soup so that he can eat it in the afternoon.
AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Seèe yu aèmboè bgúâú beèe ce aède' buu bbebep ker gee yuu mo' neè seèe ka'. AÈde' seèe ker ce geèe buu bbebep aè njáâá ká?	May it never be! We who died to sin, how could we live in it any longer?
Ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ ená weèe ye sa' mnsa', koo cáè' ese wáè, aè ma'shïì tá e koo yoè kur foñ.	If anyone sues you to take away your coat, let him have your cloak also.
Ñwáè aè ka' laa ená aè fa ye yuu, aè fa ñgaèñ yuu anaè. Ñwáè aè ka' ce koèñ aè rfoèo yuu ese wáè, aè fa sheè ka'.	Give to him who asks you, and don't turn away him who desires to borrow from you.
Pol aè m cu a woweèe aè feè' bïìi ba nto' a ce yá'ni woweèe blaâa Nyúè.	He lived there a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
E laêa, a woweèe a niñ mbe ndaèp a noêñ. Túè' aè ka' raa, e natïì a du a woweèe, bfúr moâ' aè rla' Jopaè a du a yeâ mbuèu.	So he called them in and lodged them. On the next day Peter arose and went out with them, and some of the brothers from Joppa accompanied him.
Cena yi yu ba ená ká? Yi yu ená beèe enje jáá ce a m ce gheèter aè rba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka', a yu seè'ni byáánïì njobeè' lap rbyemïì.	What shall we say then? That the Gentiles, who didn't follow after righteousness, attained to righteousness, even the righteousness which is of faith;
A weèe ce weèe aè ku táá tatap, a ma' máè aè nfeè' rmoèoshi ka'.	But you are those who have continued with me in my trials.
Sol ce a m ce too ená Pol foñ naè, aè ka' ruu neè Yú' Rara, a ke' ye a laa enáê,	But Saul, who is also called Paul, filled with the Holy Spirit, fastened his eyes on him,
E du a cu mbe rtuèu Oleèf, a ce keè' Ndap Nyúè. Awá Pitaè ba Jáêms, ker ba Joân ba Andruè a ku ba a woweèe mbo caè'caè', a bipshi yuu mo' neè ye.	As he sat on the Mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter, James, John, and Andrew asked him privately,
Wɛ̀ gwèsi muu njokɛ?	Why have you failed your child?
M túr ñger aè rgeèe yuu ce máè ka' koñ aè rgeèe. M yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. Máèè m yá Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe neè ma mmir. Weèe yu ya bo rfaè' efa rfaè' ce máè faè' neè Tataê.	Am I not free? Am I not an apostle? Haven't I seen Jesus Christ, our Lord? Aren't you my work in the Lord?
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Judaès, aè be fyeèni Muu Ñwáè neè rbaa ce aè ce baa ye nje nyoèr a?”	"But Jesus said to him, ""Judas, do you betray the Son of Man with a kiss?"""
Ñwáè aè ka' ku koo wáè aè ñger ená weèe ye jár mar moè'sir, aè jár weèe ye mar baa.	Whoever compels you to go one mile, go with him two.
a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñger ce aè ce geèe buu ca aègho li loè efá? Ñwáè ce e fa wáè ñger ca aè fa nda?”	"and they began saying to him, ""By what authority do you do these things? Or who gave you this authority to do these things?"""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè wáè, yuu wááwá ce wáè ka' ce geèe, aè gee ba yuu boèñboñ tá beèe mo' a bo yá beè'ni. Yá'ni beèe neè mini-ñwáè, fa geèe ñkáèrbuu neè lo ryá'nïì ka'.	in all things showing yourself an example of good works; in your teaching showing integrity, seriousness, incorruptibility,
Beèe ce a ce koèñ aè ryááti boèñboñ aè bsii beèe naè, a beèe ce a ce taèa weèe ená weèe gee búè. Woweèe a ce geèe wa'a faè dïì' beèe a bo fa woweèe ñgá' njobeè' woweèe a ce feè'shi aèmboè rkwe ce Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa ka'.	As many as desire to look good in the flesh, they compel you to be circumcised; only that they may not be persecuted for the cross of Christ.
Yi yu aèndeèe ená aè yá ñgá' njo' yuu boèñboñ ce aè ce geèe ce Nyúè ka' koñ ená yi ba wa'a, neè ce ená aè yá ñgá' njo' yuu bebep.	For it is better, if it is God's will, that you suffer for doing well than for doing evil.
AÈ ce bipshi neè máè njoká? Bipshi ba neè beèe ce a m yu' buu ce máè m ce laèa neè woweèe. Woweèe a rïìñ buu ce máè m laèa.”	"Why do you ask me? Ask those who have heard me what I said to them. Behold, these know the things which I said."""
Ŋgwe à koʼsi nyɛ̀nì.	The dog has raised anger.
Mɛ̌ ce tarni menɛ wàʼ m̀ be dù ntaa lɛ.	I am doubting whether I will go to market.
[A ka' geèe wa'a, blaâa Nyúè ce a sañ enáê, “A m beè' ye aè mú ñgaâa bú'shi mncir” naè vi ghááteè njo.]	"The Scripture was fulfilled, which says, ""He was numbered with transgressors."""
E m ce feè'shi a ce laèa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' be vúè embe máâ njïì ce e túr ñger a caa máè. AÈde' m ghááteè aè rbaè'shi vi bkúè blaba' ka'.	"He preached, saying, ""After me comes he who is mightier than I, the thong of whose sandals I am not worthy to stoop down and loosen."
Beèe ce a m ce doèo keñ ca a gheteèr ená a ba cañ fúú embo, a lor keñ ñká' a suusi njep roè, a bo'shi ená woweèe a ce duè kuè cuâu keñ tá a bo keèr fúr bco' mo' ce keñ e ke táá aègho njep roè naè.	As the sailors were trying to flee out of the ship, and had lowered the boat into the sea, pretending that they would lay out anchors from the bow,
Ñwáè fuèp ba ñwáè mbaèa a ka' niñ mbe dïì' ce weèe ce geèe rloo neè Nyúè, ñwáè mbaèa yar tee ce e luèu ntaa, ma' bcáâ' bboèñboñ aè nyoèr, ñwáè fuèp caè yar bcáè' ce vi yu bjaèpri,	For if a man with a gold ring, in fine clothing, comes into your synagogue, and a poor man in filthy clothing also comes in;
Asoèr aè m bi Sadoèk, Sadoèk aè bi Akïìm, Akïìm aè bi ÁÈliyuèr.	Azor became the father of Sadoc. Sadoc became the father of Achim. Achim became the father of Eliud.
Beèe ce a m ba a Jisoès weèe aè nfeè' ce e m fúr Lasoèroès efa rkwe naè a m ce suñ beèe aèmboè yuu ce yi m koni.	The multitude therefore that was with him when he called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from the dead, was testifying about it.
M ce suñ weèe máná ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè, baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	Most certainly, I tell you, he who believes in me has eternal life.
Woweèe a ka' vúè, e co' beèe ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú aè yi ñgaâa ntuu tá a woweèe a bo ce ba, tá e bo ce tuu woweèe, tá a du ce feè'shi,	He appointed twelve, that they might be with him, and that he might send them out to preach,
Fɛŋ zhi yu mbe tar ndap zhì Nfò ba zhì Ndì.	There is a space between Nfor and Ndiʼs house.
Yuu anaè yi ka' she, baná ñgaèñ be bú aè cicïì, koni yuu ka'. Geewa'a, ñgaèñ be luèñ, kuè luèñ ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e cañ mor, a coo njep mncuèñ mor a tose.	If any man's work is burned, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved, but as through fire.
Bfúr waê, aèmboè yi yu wa' naè, m ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe kur ntee du ba' aè nfeè' ce yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis be keè vúè. Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè ñgaâa nfaè' mnsuu a ke kur ntee ce keè' mbeèñ kwaêa, ker keè' nfeè' ce kwaa be bi tá a ka' kep naè.	Be patient therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient over it, until it receives the early and late rain.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce laèa wa'a, a ce faèa faèa njobeè' weèe rïìñ yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ce laèa ka', a riñ ñger Nyúè foñ ka'.	"But Jesus answered them, ""You are mistaken, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of God."
Mboè m túr ñger aè rgeèe yuu ce m ce koèñ neè ya mbaèa a? Káè aè ce ko'ndoñ njobeè' m yu mmbo-mtoo láê?’	Isn't it lawful for me to do what I want to with what I own? Or is your eye evil, because I am good?'
Ñwáè ce aède' e ye yuu yu ba nleeñwáè. A ñwáè ce e yá'ni, a lááte a riñ yuu boèñboñ ba yuu bebep.	But solid food is for those who are full grown, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern good and evil.
Yuu ce m ce laèa yi yu ená Nyúè aè m ye leè' a Abraèham wa'a, bfeè' mjeèe- kyeèe-ba-bfeè'-mntaar vi ka' caèa, e ka' fa mncir neè Juês. Mncir anaè vi túr ñger aè rbú' leè' tá yuu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' yi kúti aè yuu cicïì ka'.	Now I say this. A covenant confirmed beforehand by God in Christ, the law, which came four hundred thirty years after, does not annul, so as to make the promise of no effect.
Yoo boŋwàʼ zhi boŋ mɛ̀ sê.	I like your handwriting too much.
Weèr rïìñ werná yeèr nyor ce weèr ce cu aègho njep ñgoèñ na yu aèmboè taèp ce weèr ce cu mbo wa'a. A ka' sa'si taèp anaè, seèe ku riñ seená ndap yu mbe buèu ce aè baè'ri ba ñwáè ka'. Ndap anaè aè baè'ri Nyúè, aè ba ndap ce e be cu nfeseè.	For we know that if the earthly house of our tent is dissolved, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal, in the heavens.
E m laèa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Be keè ba aè nfeè' moè' tá weèe ja'ni mnyor weená weèe aè ba yá noèñ mo' efa mnoèñ ce Muu Ñwáè be keè vúè neè ñger-ñwáè, keè' yá ka'.	"He said to the disciples, ""The days will come, when you will desire to see one of the days of the Son of Man, and you will not see it."
Weèe aè ka' du ba', ndap ce weèe aè ka' niñ mbo, weèe ká' laa weenáê, ‘Cumúnyañ ba mbe ndaèp na.’	Into whatever house you enter, first say, 'Peace be to this house.'
Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè ce gheèter seê, aè rláè ya ntee rara aè nfeè' wááwá aè bsii Nyúè ba ñwáè.	Herein I also practice always having a conscience void of offense toward God and men.
Wɛ̌ fʉʉ à yàŋse vʉ tɛ sò dû.	You should come early in the morning so that we go.
Yi ka' ba ená m ce nya' mnde', beèe a yá ghup ená Nyúè yu ñwáâ mini, ce kuè'si ye, Nyúè ker taa máè ená m yu ñwáâ ñgeèe buu bbebep aè njáâá ká?	For if the truth of God through my lie abounded to his glory, why am I also still judged as a sinner?
À kaʼ zhɛɛ yuu ŋwɛ̀ banɛ wɛ̀ ghɛ̀ʼ ye.	If you steal somebodyʼs property therefore you have ruined him.
Túè' aè ka' raa, e vú a yá aèmboè beèe mo' efa woweèe a ce reè bkoèr. E gheteèr ená e teni bkoèr anaè, a laa enáê, ‘Bfúr waê, weèe yu bfúr; mbuèu njoká weèe ce reè bkoèr?’	"The day following, he appeared to them as they fought, and urged them to be at peace again, saying, 'Sirs, you are brothers. Why do you wrong one another?'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	27	Ñwáè ce e m káè' bkoèr naè aè doo ye, a laa enáê, ‘Ñwáè ce e geèe ená aè ba mbe weâr nduè, sa' weèr, aè geèe nda?	But he who did his neighbor wrong pushed him away, saying, 'Who made you a ruler and a judge over us?
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	28	Wáâ koèñ aè ryú máè aèmboè wáè mú yú ñwáè Ijïìp neèñkuèr naè a?’	Do you want to kill me, as you killed the Egyptian yesterday?'
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	29	E ka' laèa wa'a, Musïìs aè cañ, a du a ba kïìloè aè to' Midïìyáèn, a cu aèfo a bi boo a baa.	Moses fled at this saying, and became a stranger in the land of Midian, where he became the father of two sons.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	7	30	“Bfeè' vi ka' caèa mñkyeèe, ncïìndap Nyúè a nyáá aè rïìñ embe rtuèu Sinaèi nje múè mcuèñ mor ce mi m ce she mbe mú ce mo'. Musïìs aè yáê.	When forty years were fulfilled, an angel of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai, in a flame of fire in a bush."
Pitaè aè m ker laa buu moè' magoèr neè woweèe tá woweèe a bo yá rara enjo, a ker loo woweèe enáê, “Tee neè wee btu efa ñgá' ce e ce vúè neè ñgaâa bsaèrbuu ce e seè'ni.”	"With many other words he testified, and exhorted them, saying, ""Save yourselves from this crooked generation!"""
Byú' anaè vi ka' fúú enjep ñwáè anaè, a niñ njep kúr ñkuânyaèm caè, yi káátïì a cañ a du mbaè baa, a gweñger njep túè, a no mdip, a kweñger.	The demons came out from the man, and entered into the pigs, and the herd rushed down the steep bank into the lake, and were drowned.
E ka' jarsi buu anaè wáá, njeè aè koo aè to' anaè seê, e ke' túr yuu ye ka'.	When he had spent all of it, there arose a severe famine in that country, and he began to be in need.
E m ker du aè rla' Kaèpanuèm aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a yá'ni beèe nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè.	He came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. He was teaching them on the Sabbath day,
Seèe rïìñ seená aède' mncir vi gee ñwáè e ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka', njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè ce e yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' e byemi neè ye, ñgaèñ be luèñ.”	"Now that no man is justified by the law before God is evident, for, ""The righteous will live by faith."""
Ncïìndap Nyúè embenjïì mo aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, yuu mo' yi kuu nyúè, ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa gho aè sii, a ke' ker sañ ka', a kuu ñwáá, ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa gho aè sii, a ke' ker sañ ka', a kuu mkaèñsïì, ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa gho aè sii, a ke' ker raa ka'. Ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar e neèmootïì ba ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar e neètú' a ke' ker raa ka'.	The fourth angel sounded, and one third of the sun was struck, and one third of the moon, and one third of the stars; so that one third of them would be darkened, and the day wouldn't shine for one third of it, and the night in the same way.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèr ce weèr yu Jus seese naè, weèr yu aèmboè beèe enje jáá ce a ke láè yap yu mncir Nyúè ka' naè ka'.	"We, being Jews by nature, and not Gentile sinners,
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	16	Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèr rïìñ war ená Nyúè e ke loèr ñwáè aè ñwáâ nyáánïì njobeè' ñgaèñ ce láè mncir ka'. Yuu ce yi ke geèe ñwáè e ba nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè, ku ba rbyemïû neè Jisos Kraâis caè'caè'. Weèr ce weèr yu Juês, aè byemi neè Jisoès foñ tá Nyúè bo loèr weèr aè beâe byáánïì, ke' ba njo' mncir ce weèr ce láè ka'. Yi ku ba aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A m sañ enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè ba nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' ñgaèñ ce láè mncir ka'.”	yet knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law but through faith in Jesus Christ, even we believed in Christ Jesus, that we might be justified by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the law, because no flesh will be justified by the works of the law.
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	17	AÈde' ñwáè moè' laa ená seèe ce seèe ce koèñ aè rba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' rfaè' Jisos Kraêis, ku bii ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep njobeè' seèe ce láè mncir ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' laa wa'a, baná e ce laèa ená Jisos Kraâis ce fa beèe ñger aè rgeèe buu bbebep. Yi yu wa' ka' koo múcaèr.	But if, while we sought to be justified in Christ, we ourselves also were found sinners, is Christ a servant of sin? Certainly not!
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	18	M ka' ker ce baè'ri yuu ce máè m saè'si, baná m yu ñwáè bú'shi mncir.	For if I build up again those things which I destroyed, I prove myself a law-breaker.
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	19	Mncir vi m geèe máè riñ máná njïì moè' yu aègho neè ñwáè aè rba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' e ce láè mncir ka'. Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè ba seè'ni aèmboè gúèú ñwáè ce aède' mncir vi ker gee yuu aègho ka' wa'a, tá m bo cu ba rcu ce Nyúè koèñ.	For I, through the law, died to the law, that I might live to God.
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	20	AÈde' m laa máná a m taa weèr Jisos Kraâis mbe kïìntaa weèr ye aè kwe aèbee. A mbuèu ce ryoèñ ce m túr seè'ni na yu la ka'. Ryoèñ anaè yu ba li Jisos Kraâis ce e yu njep máâ nteèe. Rcu ce m ce cu njep ñgoèñ seè'ni na yu ba rcu rbyemïì ce li geèe máè ce láè ya ntee ba neè Muu Nyúè ce e m koèñ máè, a fa li ryoèñ njo' máè.	I have been crucified with Christ, and it is no longer I that live, but Christ living in me. That life which I now live in the flesh, I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself up for me.
Galatians	Gaèláshaè	2	21	Yi m ba ba ená aède' ñwáè ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' e lá mncir, yi ba ba ená rkwe Jisos Kraâis li yu aè cicïì. AÈde' m lor ntee boèñboñ ce Nyúè túr neè seèe na aè yuu cicïì ka'.	I don't make void the grace of God. For if righteousness is through the law, then Christ died for nothing!"
Cɛpmir ca e ke feese yùʼnshe sê.	This white yam resembles yellow yams very much.
E ka' kani yuu ce weèr aè m laèa, weèr aè bornïì yer yu, a laa wernáê, “Tá Tata Nyúè gee yuu ce e koèñ.”	"When he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, ""The Lord's will be done."""
A ke bùu ŋkʉʉ à njii kaʼ.	Not everyone can greet the chief by clapping.
Ku' beèe a vúê, a ke' laa yuu mo'sir ka'. AÈ ka' ba aè lúèsimbuèu, beèe mo' beèe a mmbaa a vúê,	and they found none. Even though many false witnesses came forward, they found none. But at last two false witnesses came forward,
Pailáèt aè laa neè ye enáê, “Baná aè yu ñkúú a?” Jisoès a beesïì enáê, “To wáè laèa wáná m yu ñkúú. A m bi máè njep ñgoèñ na, máè vúè máná m bo suñ beèe aèmboè yuu mini. A mbuèu ce a m bi máè njep ñgoèñ na. Ñwáè ce e ka' táá njep mini, a ñwáè ce e yu' wa blaèa.”	"Pilate therefore said to him, ""Are you a king then?"" Jesus answered, ""You say that I am a king. For this reason I have been born, and for this reason I have come into the world, that I should testify to the truth. Everyone who is of the truth listens to my voice."""
Beâe aè rla' Nenávïì a be keèe táá aè noèñ mnsa' a ñgúè beèe yïû seè'ni na, laèa ená woweèe a geèe yuu bebep njobeè' Jonaè aè m feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè woweèe, woweèe a kupseè a ma' yaèp buu bbebep. Yá neè, yuu mo' yi yu mbena seè'ni na ce yi caèa Jonaè.	The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, for they repented at the preaching of Jonah; and behold, someone greater than Jonah is here.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe ce roèo máè ba njo' ncoèo ce weèe aè mú yá máè duñshïì naè ka'. Weèe ce roèo máè ba njo' bráâd ce weèe aè mú ye a yu'.	"Jesus answered them, ""Most certainly I tell you, you seek me, not because you saw signs, but because you ate of the loaves, and were filled."
Woweèe a be keè yá'ni ená mbañruèñwáè fa loèr ñgwa ka', keèr yá'ni ená njeñwáè du bguèu foñ ka'. Woweèe a be keè yá'ni beèe ená woweèe a fa ye njáèá byee mo' ka'. Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m geèe byee tá beèe ce a byemi a riñ yuu mini a bo ye ce yoèñshi ye.	forbidding marriage and commanding to abstain from foods which God created to be received with thanksgiving by those who believe and know the truth.
e ká' a ce yá'ni woweèe a laa enáê,	He opened his mouth and taught them, saying,
A yuu woowèe a tʉr àcùu a?	Is that what they are currently talking about?
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. M yu ñwáè ntuu ba aè ñger Nyúè ce e geèe seèe aè luñ ker ba aè ñger Jisos Kraâis ce e geèe seèe aè lá mmir mbenduè buu ce vi be keè ba.	Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus according to the commandment of God our Savior, and Christ Jesus our hope;
E rè bkor a ŋkar zhì.	He has fought with his friend.
A mboè weèe ce koosimnse seè'ni wa'a, geewa'a m be keèr yá weèe, tá weèe lu'shi aè nfeè' anaè, tá ñwáè moè' ker jepsi weèe efa rlu'shïì ka'.	Therefore you now have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no one will take your joy away from you.
“Ñwáè ce e ka' gee moè' efa boo bká' ce a byemi neè máè na, e gee yuu bebep, baná yi be ba aèndeèe neè ye ce a ka' lor ma luâr ñgoè' baa cúú ye kuè ndoñ, ma' njep rdip rgoèr.	Whoever will cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it would be better for him if he was thrown into the sea with a millstone hung around his neck.
Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce weèr ce feè'shi neè beèe yu ená Jisoès aè m fúú efa rkwe. Weèr aè ka' ce feè'shi wa'a, beèe mo' efa weèe a ce laèa yap ená beèe a be keè fúú efa rkwe ka' njoká?	Now if Christ is preached, that he has been raised from the dead, how do some among you say that there is no resurrection of the dead?
Yú' mo' yi ke loè niñ njep ye, koo ye, e war, yú' anaè yi ma' ye aè nsheè, e búúñgeèr, bdúdú' vi ce fúú ye ekuè cuèu. Yú' anaè yi ke geèe wa'a, e sá seê, yi ce koèñ aè rmaè'shi ye ka'.	Behold, a spirit takes him, he suddenly cries out, and it convulses him so that he foams, and it hardly departs from him, bruising him severely.
Yi ka' yú mbaèñ aè feè' e koâo, yi ba yáánïì. Yi ka' neè yú ka', aè gwaêr.’ ”	"If it bears fruit, fine; but if not, after that, you can cut it down.'"""
A m jaèasi beèe moè', a lip weèe mo', a kur weèe mo' mkoo a fa mbe shañ.	Others were tried by mocking and scourging, yes, moreover by bonds and imprisonment.
Ñwáè aè ka' ke laa neè weèe aè nfeè' anaè enáê, ‘Yáê, a Kraâis na’, káè enáê, ‘A ye naè’ áè, weèe fa byemi ka',	Then if anyone tells you, 'Look, here is the Christ!' or, 'Look, there!' don't believe it.
Túè' aè ka' raa, ce noèñ ce a m ce fáèr buu mmbomntaa Nyúè yi m caèa yi wáá, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe Farïìsi a du a yá Pailáèt,	Now on the next day, which was the day after the Preparation Day, the chief priests and the Pharisees were gathered together to Pilate,
Máè koèñ weèe wááwá njobeè' seèe wááwá yu aèbee seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe. Yi yu wa'a.	My love to all of you in Christ Jesus. Amen.
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsi a ce fyá' ená e be geèe tá ñwáè yañ moè' ke'se nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè lá, tá woweèe a bo sa' ye ená e bú' ncir.	The scribes and the Pharisees watched him, to see whether he would heal on the Sabbath, that they might find an accusation against him.
Woweèe a fúú aè rla' anaè a duè aè ryá ye.	They went out of the city, and were coming to him.
Nfò tʉr boo sê.	Nfor has many children.
Lʉ̀simbùu efagho yu enɛ ŋwɛ̀ fa kèr jòo kaʼ.	The conclusion is that no one should touch it again.
Mú beèe mo' a ku bii aè rla' Sadïìs, ce a siisi wap bcáè' ka'. Beèe ca a be maè' bcáâ' bbúú tá weèr woweèe ce jáèr njobeè' a beèe ce a ghááte aè rgeèe wa'a.	Nevertheless you have a few names in Sardis that did not defile their garments. They will walk with me in white, for they are worthy.
AÈ m ba nyúè moè' Jisoès aè ka' ce yá'ni beèe mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a bleebeèe weèe a vúê,	It happened on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple and preaching the Good News, that the priests and scribes came to him with the elders.
Wɛr btâ a mkòŋ à rtaŋshi btaŋshì sê.	Our fathers loved offering a lot of sacrifices.
yu'ni neè yoè ta ba yoè maê, ker ce koñ nfúroè aèmboè aè koèñ yoè nyor.”	"Honor your father and mother.' And, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'"""
còʼcòʼ [tʃɔ̀ʔ-tʃɔ̀ʔ] ideo.	heavy.
Ñwáè ka' túr ñgwa, e fa taè' nduunjïì aè rjuèu ye ka, ñwáè ka' tá túr ñgwa ka', e fa taè' nduunjïì aè rloèr ñgwa ka'.	Are you bound to a wife? Don't seek to be freed. Are you free from a wife? Don't seek a wife.
Túè' aè ka' raa, Pol aè lor beèe anaè a woweèe a gee yuu ce ncir yi m ce laèa ená a gee tá a bo ba brara aè bsii Nyúè. A woweèe a ka' mïìsi, e du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a suñ beèe noèñ ce woweèe a be geèe buu anaè mïìsi tá a bo vúè fa rfa aètu ñwáè wááwá.	Then Paul took the men, and the next day, purified himself and went with them into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for every one of them.
Ha wáâ Nyúè! Ñkúú ce aè ce cu nfeseè, ce aède' aè kwe ka', ce aède' ñwáè yá wáè neè mmir ka', ce nyúè moè' ker ba caa efa wáè ka', tá beèe a yu'ni neè wáè, tá aè sa' foèo nfeseè. Yi yu wa'a.	Now to the King eternal, immortal, invisible, to God who alone is wise, be honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
E ka' gee yuu bebep neè wáè aè noâñ mo'sir ñkaèraè' saèambaê, ce vúè ce laèa neè wáè aè ñkaèraè' saèamba anaè enáê, ‘Máè kupse a ma' ya yuu bebep,’ aè foosïì ye.”	"If he sins against you seven times in the day, and seven times returns, saying, 'I repent,' you shall forgive him."""
Woweèe a ka' ye wáá, e lor ndoñ a laa enáê, “Ndoñ ca táá aètu leâ' fi ce Nyúè aè ye a beèe neè wa bláá. Kuushi neè máè aè nfeè' wááwá ce weèe ka' ce no enjep ndoñ ca.”	"In the same way he also took the cup, after supper, saying, ""This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Do this, as often as you drink, in memory of me."""
Bsoogáè a vú a kepshi mkuèu ese ñwáè entombïì a ker kepshi mkuèu ese ñwáè moè' ce a m taa mbe kïìntaa foñ naè.	Therefore the soldiers came, and broke the legs of the first, and of the other who was crucified with him;
Ncïìndap Nyúè moâ' jáá aè vú a táá mbe dïì' ce a ke fa rfa neè Nyúè, a túr rkïûñ ntoèo nráèá ce a m geèe neè guêl. A lor ku' nráèá a fa ye, ye ye aè lor nráèá anaè a fiñshi aè múè mloo ce beèe Nyúè a ce loo, a fa neè Nyúè mbe dïì' rfa ce a geèe neè guêl, yi ba kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè'.	Another angel came and stood over the altar, having a golden censer. Much incense was given to him, that he should add it to the prayers of all the saints on the golden altar which was before the throne.
“Ñwáè ce e suèu embe buèu a ñwáè ce e yu mbenduè buu wááwá. Ñwáè enjep ñgoèñ ku ba ñwáè enjep ñgoèñ, a ce laèa yi ba aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ. Ñwáè ce e suèu yi ba embe buèu naè yu mbenduè buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè m geèe.	He who comes from above is above all. He who is from the Earth belongs to the Earth, and speaks of the Earth. He who comes from heaven is above all.
Pol aè m yá ená e be táá aè rla' Áfásoès ka', faè dïì' e bo caèasi nfeè' moè' aè ñgoâñ Áshaè ka', njobeè' e m ce koèñ ená e du cárcár tá e bo yá ená aède' e ba' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè noèñ Pántikoès lá.	For Paul had determined to sail past Ephesus, that he might not have to spend time in Asia; for he was hastening, if it were possible for him, to be in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost.
Wɛ̀r ye à ba suŋ zhi tɛɛ wɛɛ, nfʉr zhìi à vʉ nè rtarnì njoo.	I discussed with him and everything was alright, then his brother brought in doubts.
Woweèe a du a ba' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, Jisoès aè ka' niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a yá beèe mo' aèmboè a ce fyeèni buu, weèe mo' a ce yuu. E m juèu woweèe e mbo. E m buète btábuèr ese beèe ce a m ce kupse mbaèa, ker ba mnta' ese beèe ce a m ce fyeèni bbeèñ.	They came to Jerusalem, and Jesus entered into the temple, and began to throw out those who sold and those who bought in the temple, and overthrew the tables of the money changers, and the seats of those who sold the doves.
Máè ka' ce cañ ya, a ke' ce cañ ba aè nji ka', a ku ce keè' ba kuèntombïì tá m bo cañ mïìsi. M ce maè' dúè' a ke' ce maè' ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e ce maè' aè bjiji ka'.	I therefore run like that, as not uncertainly. I fight like that, as not beating the air,
Njeñwáè ca aè m yar bcáâ' bbeer, aè ba bcáè' ce vi m boèñ seê. E m suèsi yïì nyor neè buu jáá jáèá jáá. AÈ m ba buu aèmboè bkwaèñ, ba mncïìi ba byáèári. A m geèe buu anaè neè gul ker ba bluèr ce vi m ce laè'ñger seê. E m túr ndoñ ce a geèe neè gul mba yeâ boè, ndoñ anaè aè ruu neè bsaèrbuu efa yïì saèkïì.	The woman was dressed in purple and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup full of abominations and the impurities of the sexual immorality of the earth.
Nyʉ̀ à m boo rbuu ba nshe.	God made Heaven and Earth.
Btu embe cor ce a ka' ce geèe lap rfaè' boèñboñ baná woweèe a ghááte aè beèe ce cor aè ba yu'ni neè woweèe jáá, keèr fyá' aè woweèe boèñboñ. M ce laèa lañlañ ñgaâa rfeè'shïì ce a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè, a ker ce yá'ni vi boèñboñ se naè.	Let the elders who rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching.
Ñwáè ka' borni efa rgeèe buu bbebep, e ba aèmboè bghee bboèñboñ ba mkïûñ mmboèñmboñ caè. E yu ñwáâ nrara ce aède' Nyúè lor gee rfaè' aègho, njobeè' e tami nyor aè rgeèe mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ ce Nyúè ce koèñ ená e gee naè aè nfeè' wááwá.	If anyone therefore purges himself from these, he will be a vessel for honor, sanctified, and suitable for the master's use, prepared for every good work.
A m fúr woweèe embe ndaèp, a tár mbe waâp tar, a ká' a ce bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè geèe ca ba aè ñger nda? Weèe aè geèe ba aè rlii nda?”	"When they had stood them in the middle of them, they inquired, ""By what power, or in what name, have you done this?"""
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Ya Taê, foèosi woweèe, njobeè' woweèe a rïìñ yuu ce a ce geèe ka'.” Woweèe a m loèr vi bcáè', a ma' kaèñ aègho, beèe ce a m so a du neè bcáè' anaè.	"Jesus said, ""Father, forgive them, for they don't know what they are doing."" Dividing his garments among them, they cast lots."
Tá Jisos Kraâis ka' keè fa yi kúú neè yïì Taê, e be kuè sa' duè baè' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè be so beèe ce a baèa ye, láè woweèe wááwá njep yeâ tïìi.	For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
Beèe a m ba magoèr, woweèe a ke' yi aè rcaèa neè ñgaèñ duè yá Jisoès ka'. Woweèe a ko' a to' toto mbe tu ndap aè ñkeè'nïì embe dïì' ce Jisoès cu. A ka' to', a suusi ye mbe ndaèp njïû aè toto anaè mbe keèñ.	When they could not come near to him for the crowd, they removed the roof where he was. When they had broken it up, they let down the mat that the paralytic was lying on.
Ŋkoombʉ à bashi mɛ̀ à bcɛ̀ʼ.	Blackjack has stuck on my clothes.
Awá ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' efa múè beâe bgoèrgoèr ca aè laa neè máè enáê, “Fa war ka'. Yáê, ñwáè ce a too ená búrúè' ce yu yïû aè ñgoâñ Judaè, a ba muu rlii embe ndúè' Dávïìd naè, aè so. E be naèa nlaèadoñ ce a sïìñ bcuèu ñwaè' aègho bdïì' saèamba naè, búèr ñwaè' anaè.”	"One of the elders said to me, ""Don't weep. Behold, the Lion who is of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has overcome; he who opens the book and its seven seals."""
Máè m yá Ndap Nyúè aè rla' anaè ka' njobeè' yïìseèe Ta Nyúè ce ñger wááwá yi yu mba yeâ mmboè, ba muu njeèe a m ba aè rla' anaè.	I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God, the Almighty, and the Lamb, are its temple.
Ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' a m vúè foñ ená e baptir woweèe, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, weèr be geèe wer ká?”	"Tax collectors also came to be baptized, and they said to him, ""Teacher, what must we do?"""
A máè byee ce aè ryoèñ.	I am the bread of life.
Ku ba ba buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe ce vi ce warñger ka'. See seèe ce Nyúè aè fa seèe yi yú' ce yu rfa entombïì naè, seèe ce warñger enjep ntee foñ, a ce keè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be koo seèe aèmboè boo vi, geèe tá viseèe mnyor vi luêñ.	Not only so, but ourselves also, who have the first fruits of the Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body.
E ka' baè' mbo a yu' buu ce aède' e suñ ka'. Nyúè aè maè'shi ená ñwáè suñ buu anaè neè beèe ka'.	how he was caught up into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter.
Jisoès aè ka' ce yá'ni beèe, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Lor neè nfeè' neè ñgeèe ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir. Woweèe a koèñ aè ryar mñgaèbúlaè ce kar aègho, ker koñ ená beèe a ce ca'ni woweèe aè mntaa.	"In his teaching he said to them, ""Beware of the scribes, who like to walk in long robes, and to get greetings in the marketplaces,"
Buu ca aè ka' ká' ce koni, weèe táá mbekïì, naa btu, njobeè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be tee weèe efa ñgá' ce gháá.”	"But when these things begin to happen, look up, and lift up your heads, because your redemption is near."""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè rfaè' ce Jisoès ce geèe, li caèa rfaè' ce ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì mo' ca a ce geèe. Yi yu foñ ená leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye seèe woweèe, tañshïì efa gho aè ba Jisoès naè, yi boèñ a caa yïì ce yi m ba entombïì. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè kaè' seèe buu ce vi boèñ a caa vïì ce vi m ba njo' leè' anaè.	But now he has obtained a more excellent ministry, by so much as he is also the mediator of a better covenant, which on better promises has been given as law.
Máè ce ya tu, a lá rara njo' woweèe, tá aè bo ce woweèe foñ, láè rara neè yoè mini.	For their sakes I sanctify myself, that they themselves also may be sanctified in truth.
Ku ba ye ce aède' e kwe ka', a ce cu ba aè rraa ce aède' ñwáè ba' aètútú efa gho ka'. Ñwáè aè m be yá ye ka', aède' ñwáè yá ye ka'. Tá beèe a yu'ni neè ye, tá yi ñger yi cu nfeseè. Yi yu wa'a.	who alone has immortality, dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor can see: to whom be honor and eternal power. Amen.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, buu ca vi be ba ba aè se'ká? Yuu ce yi be duèñshi ená nfeè' ce buu ca be koni aè gháá, be ba ká?”	"They asked him, ""Teacher, so when will these things be? What is the sign that these things are about to happen?"""
Pitaè aè laa enáê, “Tataê, aè ce maè' ñgaèa ca ba neè weèr káè neè beèe wááwá?”	"Peter said to him, ""Lord, are you telling this parable to us, or to everybody?"""
Baná weèe aè ka' ke yá aèmboè buu ca vi ce koni, weèe riñ weená nfeè' kúú Nyúè aè gháá.	Even so you also, when you see these things happening, know that the Kingdom of God is near.
Seèe aè ka' túr bcáè' ba byee, seèe ma'shïì tá vi ghááte seèe.	But having food and clothing, we will be content with that.
A m koo beèe ce a m sañ map mlii mbe ñwaâ' ryoèñ ka', a ma' njep ma mor anaè.	If anyone was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a yoñse mbe waâp nduè a laa enáê, “Koo neè Yú' Rara.	"When he had said this, he breathed on them, and said to them, ""Receive the Holy Spirit!"
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Haba! Weâe beèe eluèuni ce weèe buu rbyemïì, a beesi mini tútúèñ na. M be cu weèe seèe duè baè' fá? M be kur ntee neè weèe duè baè' fá? Vúè neè muu anaè fa neè máè mbena.”	"Jesus answered, ""Faithless and perverse generation! How long will I be with you? How long will I bear with you? Bring him here to me."""
nan	but now is revealed, and by the Scriptures of the prophets, according to the commandment of the eternal God, is made known for obedience of faith to all the nations;
Beèe a misïì a ghaa goèr seê, beèe mo' efa ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ce a m ba yap beèe Farïìsïî, a natïì mbekïì a laa tatap seê, enáê, Weèr a yá faèa moè' neè ñwáè ca ka'! Seèe rïìñ neè ká aèmboè aè laèa ba yú' mo' káè ncïìndap Nyúè neè ye.	"A great clamor arose, and some of the scribes of the Pharisees part stood up, and contended, saying, ""We find no evil in this man. But if a spirit or angel has spoken to him, let's not fight against God!"""
Beâe aè rla' Nenávïì a be keè naèti táá aè noâñ mnsa', laèa ená a ñgúè beèe yïû seè'ni aè geèe yuu bebep njobeè' Jonaè aè m feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè woweèe, woweèe a kupse a ma' yaèp buu bbebep. Yá neè! Yuu mo' yi yu mbena seè'ni na ce yi caèa Jonaè.	The men of Nineveh will stand up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it: for they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, one greater than Jonah is here.
mbeèñ aè gweê, mdip mi ruu, fu' yi caa a ci' ndap anaè seê, e ke' gwe ka' njobeè' a m boo kuèu efa gho mbenduè ryáá.	The rain came down, the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat on that house; and it didn't fall, for it was founded on the rock.
Weèr aè ka' yu' wa'a, weèr beâe aè rla' anaè weèe aè bu' mmbo neè ye ená e fa duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ka'.	When we heard these things, both we and they of that place begged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
Weèr aè rïìñ seè'ni na ená aè rïìñ buu wááwá. Mbuèu moè' ker ba aègho neè ñwáè aè rbipshi yuu mo' neè wáè ka'. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' cena, weèr a byemi ená wáè loè ese Nyúè.”	"Now we know that you know all things, and don't need for anyone to question you. By this we believe that you came forth from God."""
Ñwáè moè' efa waâp mú aè ke' ker buu yuu mo' ka'. Beèe ce a m túr mñkúè, káè mndap áè, a m ce fyeèni, ce vúè neè mbaèa efa gho,	For neither was there among them any who lacked, for as many as were owners of lands or houses sold them, and brought the proceeds of the things that were sold,
Weèe aè m koni yuu ce weèr aè m ce geèe, a koni yuu ce Tata Jisoès aè m ce geèe. Ka' a m fa weèe ñgá' goèr wa'a, weèe aè m ku yu' blaèa ca a byemi, Yú' Rara yi gee weèe aè ce lu'shi.	You became imitators of us, and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Spirit,
Woweèe a waanïì enáê, “Mïìsi ye! Mïìsi ye! Taa ye mbe kïìntaa!” Pailáèt aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce koèñ ená m taa yeè ñkúú mbe kïìntaa a?” Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaèa tañshi tañshïì a beesïì enáê, “Weèr túr ñkúú moè' caa efa Sisaè ka'.”	"They cried out, ""Away with him! Away with him! Crucify him!"" Pilate said to them, ""Shall I crucify your King?"" The chief priests answered, ""We have no king but Caesar!"""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ku gee aèmboè e m laèa, a fár byee ñkaè' anaè.	The disciples did as Jesus commanded them, and they prepared the Passover.
Ñwáè rbyeè yu yuu mo' ka', ñwáè rñwañshi neè mdip aè ba yuu mo' foñ ka'. Ñwáâ ñgoèr ku ba ba Nyúè ce e geèe buu ce a byeè vi ce kuè'.	So then neither he who plants is anything, nor he who waters, but God who gives the increase.
E ka' laèa wa' mïìsi, AÈnaèniyaès aè natïì a du a niñ mbe ndaèp, a lá mi mmbo mbenduè Soêl, a laa enáê, “Nfúraâ Soêl, Tata Jisoès ce e m yááti aè nduunjïì ce wáè m vúè njo, aè tuu máè ená m vú gee tá aè ker yá buu, ruusi neè Yú' Rara.”	"Ananias departed, and entered into the house. Laying his hands on him, he said, ""Brother Saul, the Lord, who appeared to you on the road by which you came, has sent me, that you may receive your sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit."""
À kaʼ tɛ koontìr kaʼ muu wòo ca lo zhɛ̂ɛ.	If you donʼt act in time, this child of yours shall become a thief.
Ncep ce máè m fa weèe e m ba ba ená weèe fa kar weèe ñwáè ce e ce laèa ená e yu nfúr, a ker ce saèki ka'. Káè yu ñwáè ñko'ndoñ áè, káè nyáèá áè, káè yu ñwáè ce e ce loo neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na áè, káè yu ñwáè ce e ce cáp beèe áè, káè yu no ñkoo áè, weèe woweèe fa keè kar ka'. Fa keè ye byee weèe njáèá beèe anaè weèe ka'.	But as it is, I wrote to you not to associate with anyone who is called a brother who is a sexual sinner, or covetous, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner. Don't even eat with such a person.
Weèe ce lu'shi nfeè' sïìp njobeè' weèe yu weèe Tata weèe; m ker ce laèa máná weèe lu'shi.	Rejoice in the Lord always! Again I will say, Rejoice!
Ntaa kwâa à sùu.	The price of corn has reduced.
Máè m ce faè' neè Tataê, a ce naèa tu ka', a ce faè' neè mñgoommir-ñwáè, ker ba mmoèoshïì ce mi m vúè neè máè njo' mncúè ce Jus a m cúè máè.	serving the Lord with all humility, with many tears, and with trials which happened to me by the plots of the Jews;
Woweèe a wáp ená keñ be kuèu nyor aè bluèr njep múè roè, a lor bco' ce keñ e ke táá aègho njep múè roè naè embaè mbuèu keñ vi kyeèe, a fa njep roè, a loo ená túè' raa cárcár.	Fearing that we would run aground on rocky ground, they let go four anchors from the stern, and wished for daylight.
a bipshi enáê, “Muu ce a bi ye aè ñkúú Jus naè yuê? Weèr aè yá li rkaèñsïì kuè mbuèuntii, a vú aè rgú'shi neè ye.”	Where is he who is born King of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.
Jisoès aè m ce yá'ni mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá, e ba aè mbuèuñkuèr e du mbe rtuèu Oleèf cu mbo túè' raa.	Every day Jesus was teaching in the temple, and every night he would go out and spend the night on the mountain that is called Olivet.
E ka' duè baè' aètútú rla' Bátáfáè ba rla' Bátanïì aègee rtuèu Oleèf, a tuu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu beèe aè baa, a laa neè woweèe enáê,	It happened, when he drew near to Bethsphage and Bethany, at the mountain that is called Olivet, he sent two of his disciples,
Nyúè aè m ká' weèe, weèe aè konïì ryoèñ ca aè nfeè' ce weèr aè m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè weèe naè. E m ká' weèe tá weèe bo sa' foèo ce yu foèo Tata Jisoès.	to which he called you through our Good News, for the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Yuu ce yi yu aètáèr yu ba yïû fá? Yu ba aè rlaèa enáê, ‘Máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep’ káè aè rlaèa enáê, ‘Loè mbekïì, jáêr’?	Which is easier to say, 'Your sins are forgiven you;' or to say, 'Arise and walk?'
“Ñwáè mbaèa moè' aè m ba ce e m ce suèsi nyor neè bcáâ' mbaèa, a ce yu' rboèñ neè yïì nyor aè mnoèñ wááwá.	"Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and fine linen, living in luxury every day.
Luke	Luêk	16	20	Ñwáè fuèp moè' ce a m ce too ená Lasoèroès aè m noèñ aè yi cuèu ñka', bkoètá vi koo ye aè nyor nsïìp.	A certain beggar, named Lazarus, was laid at his gate, full of sores,
Luke	Luêk	16	21	E m ce koèñ aè rye mkúâ' buu ce mi m ce gweèñger embe tábuèr ñwáè mbaèa anaè. Ñgwe yi m ce vúè ce báèñshi vi mnfur.	and desiring to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. Yes, even the dogs came and licked his sores.
Luke	Luêk	16	22	Ñwáè fuèp ca aè m loè a kwe, bcïìndap Nyúè vi lor ye a du aègho a lá mbe mmbo Abraèhaêm. Ñwáè mbaèa aè m loè a kwe foñ, a tuñ ye.	It happened that the beggar died, and that he was carried away by the angels to Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried.
Luke	Luêk	16	23	E m duè njep mor a ce yá mluè njo. A ka' naèa mmir fyá' mbekïì a yá Abraèham aènjïìsaèp seê, a yá aèmboè Lasoèroès cu a yeâ geñ.	In Hades, he lifted up his eyes, being in torment, and saw Abraham far off, and Lazarus at his bosom.
Luke	Luêk	16	24	E ká' Abraèham a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Ta Abraèhaêm, koosimnse neè máè, tuu Lasoèroès tá e fúú ntubo njep mdip, cáási máè mbe rlee, tá li fúte, njobeè' m ce yá mluè njep mor na seê.’	He cried and said, 'Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue! For I am in anguish in this flame.'
Luke	Luêk	16	25	Abraèham aè beesïì enáê, ‘Muu waè, kuushi ená wáè m koni ku' yoè buu bboèñboñ aè nfeè' ce wáè m ba njep ñgoèñ. Lasoèroès aè konïì yi ba buu bbebep, aè ka' ba seè'ni na Lasoèroès aè cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè, wáè ce yá ñgá'.	But Abraham said, 'Son, remember that you, in your lifetime, received your good things, and Lazarus, in the same way, bad things. But now here he is comforted and you are in anguish."
Ñwáè ka' ce laèa njáèá li ce e m be yá'ni ka', baná e ce laèa ba neè beèe ka', e ce laèa ba neè Nyúè njobeè' aède' ñwáè moè' yu' yuu e ce laèa ka'. E ce laèa buu ce aè bsúèti aè ñger Yú' Nyúè.	For he who speaks in another language speaks not to men, but to God; for no one understands; but in the Spirit he speaks mysteries.
Beèe ce Nyúè aè m bepsi ntee neè woweèe aè bfeè' mñkyeèe naè aè m ba weèe ká? AÈ m ba beèe ce a m geèe buu bbebep a kweñger aè rïìñ naè.	With whom was he displeased forty years? Wasn't it with those who sinned, whose bodies fell in the wilderness?
A cìisi enɛ ŋwɛ̀ fa kèr càa mbena kaʼ.	They have emphasized that no one should pass this way.
Rùu zhi tɛɛ ntìni sê.	It has been clear weather all day today.
A m fa ye ñwaè' ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m sañ. E múè' ñwaè' anaè a fyá' mbe dïì' ce a m sañ enáê,	The book of the prophet Isaiah was handed to him. He opened the book, and found the place where it was written,
Taitoès aè m ku byemi ba yuu ce weèr aè m laèa neè ye ka', e koèñ aè rjaè' weèe seê, a kwa'shi seè'ni neè yi tu ená e be vúè yá weèe.	For he indeed accepted our exhortation, but being himself very earnest, he went out to you of his own accord.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a baèa máè naè, ce a m ce koèñ ená m ba yaèp ñkúú ka' naè, vúè neè neè woweèe mbena, sháshi a máâ bsii.’ ”	"But bring those enemies of mine who didn't want me to reign over them here, and kill them before me.'"""
Woweèe a ká' a ce laèa fa waâp mú enáê, “E laèa wa'a njobeè' seèe aè vúè neè bráâd ka'.”	"They reasoned among themselves, saying, ""We brought no bread."""
AÈ ka' ba neètú' ce mnoèñ vi baè' war ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú, nteèendúñ aè ku ce daè' neè weèr aè rdip ce a m ce too ená AÈnduyaè. AÈ ba aèmboè neè ntee tú' wa'a, beèe ce a m ce doèo keñ a yu' enjep bláá ená woweèe a ce baè' aèwaâa roè.	But when the fourteenth night had come, as we were driven back and forth in the Adriatic Sea, about midnight the sailors surmised that they were drawing near to some land.
Bfúr wa ce máè koèñ seê, fa byemi neè tá ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka'.	Don't be deceived, my beloved brothers.
A ke màʼ bliŋgar à nfè ce a ke suŋ mghàghar.	We say riddles when we are telling tales.
Weèr aè m baè' aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè a lúshi ka', mluè mi ku bii neè weèr. Ñgá' aè konïì weèr aè mnjïì wááwá, beèe a ce káè' weèr msïì'si, weèr a ce wáp.	For even when we had come into Macedonia, our flesh had no relief, but we were afflicted on every side. Fightings were outside. Fear was inside.
Weèe rïìñ ená Ásoè aè m ker lo a koñ ená yïì ta aè ba ghoèni ye, yi ta aè kanïì yi yu. Njïì moè' aè m ker ba neè Ásoè aè rkupse yuu ce e m geèe na ka', ka' e m ce war ená yïì ta ghoni ye, mñgoommir mi ce suèu wa'a.	For you know that even when he afterward desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place for a change of mind though he sought it diligently with tears.
Ŋgèe běe àfa zhi bòŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ.	I donʼt like the fashion of the people of this place.
Bfúr waê, Nyúè aè ká' weèe faè dïì' weèe bo keèr ce faè' bkwaèa neè mncir ka'. AÈmboè weèe ker bii ce faè' bkwaèa neè mncir ka' naè, weèe fa laèa weená aède' weèe ku gee yuu ce weèe koèñ ka'. Yuu ce weèe aè ba geèe yi yu ená weèe koñ bfúr mo', ce fa' neè woweèe.	For you, brothers, were called for freedom. Only don't use your freedom for gain to the flesh, but through love be servants to one another.
“Weèe aè ka' yá yuu bsaèrbuu ce yi ce bepsi Ndap Nyúè (ñwáè ce e ce beè' ñwaè' ca rïìñ), baná beèe ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a cañ duse aè mtuèu.	But when you see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not (let the reader understand), then let those who are in Judea flee to the mountains,
Jisoès ye ye aè m fúú efa múè rla' a ka' kwe tá e bo siñsi buu bebep ce beèe a m geèe neè vi bláá.	Therefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered outside of the gate.
E bʉsi mbàa, a ce tarni dìʼ ce zhi bʉ.	He misplaced money and was doubting where it got lost.
Leè' anaè yi be ba jáá efa yïì ce máè m ye weèr wap bta aè noèñ ce máè m jaè' woweèe, a fúr woweâe aè to' Ijïìp naè. Woweèe a m bú' leè' ce máè m ye weèr woweèe, máè beesïì njïì neè woweèe. Nlaèa ca aè laèa máâ Tata Nyúè.	"not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I took them by the hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt; for they didn't continue in my covenant, and I disregarded them,"" says the Lord."
Nfeè' báti goèr ka', tá Nyúè ce e ke fa beèe cumúnyañ so Sataèn, maè' njep weâe tïìi tá weèe tár mkuèu mbe yeâ nduè. M ce loo máná tá yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	And the God of peace will quickly crush Satan under your feet. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you.
Weèe gee buu wááwá aè nduunjïì ce ñwáè wááwá bo yá ená weèe yu neè rbornïì-ñwáè. Kuushi neè ená nfeè' múcaèr tá Tata vúê.	Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is at hand.
Felep aè ká' embe dïì' ce ñwáè anaè aè ba ce beè' naè, a fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ kuu Jisoès neè ye.	Philip opened his mouth, and beginning from this Scripture, preached to him Jesus.
Ñgaâa fuèp a ku ba weèe woweèe aè nfeè' sïìp, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, seèe be ba aè nfeè' sïìp ka'.	For you always have the poor with you; but you don't always have me.
Mɛ̀ tʉr rsii rbòŋboŋ ntìni.	I have good luck today.
Woweèe a m ce yá'ni a ce feè'shi mbe Ndaèp Nyúè ba aè mla' aè mnoèñ wááwá ená Jisoès yu Kraâis anaè.	Every day, in the temple and at home, they never stopped teaching and preaching Jesus, the Christ.
Mbèʼ à tute.	The pap is lumpy.
Jisoès aè laa neè ñwáè ñgoèr anaè enáê, “Duè, yi be kuè ba aèmboè wáè byemi ená yi be ba naè.” Yïì ñwáè rfaè' aè m ku ke'se aè nfeè' anaè.	"Jesus said to the centurion, ""Go your way. Let it be done for you as you have believed."" His servant was healed in that hour."
AÈsayaè ye ye aè m laèa enáê, “Ñwáè embe ndúè' Jáásïì be vúè. E be vúè tá e bo sa' beèe enje jáá aèmboè yaèp ñkúú. Beèe enje jáá wááwá a be láè mmir mbe yeâ nduè.”	"Again, Isaiah says, ""There will be the root of Jesse, he who arises to rule over the Gentiles; in him the Gentiles will hope."""
Josáèf aè lá' efa mmirloèè, a lor muu ba ma muu neètú', a du aè to' Ijïìp,	He arose and took the young child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt,
Beèe a ba kwaè'shi aèmboè yuu ca boèñboñ seê, neè bfee-ñwáè. Ñwáè ce e ka' túr bfee baná ñgaèñ riñ yuu ce nombaè ca táá aètu mo. Nombaè ca táá aètu ñwáè. Nombaè anaè yu mjeèe ntuunfu neè ncoèp-ntuunfu-aè-mntuunfu.	Here is wisdom. He who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is the number of a man. His number is six hundred sixty-six.
Bɛɛrì wèe à fɛŋ ce wèe à fa nè mɛ̀ enɛ m̀ lâa.	Thank you for the opportunity you have given to me to speak.
E dù a beʼmi.	He has gone out of sight.
Tetèr e ke cʉ̀ʼ wɛ̀ yur sê.	If a caterpillar touches you, it irritates a lot.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Loè efa máâ geñ, Sataèn, njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Gú'shi neè Tata ce e yu yoè Nyúè, fa' ba neè ye caè'caè'.’ ”	"Then Jesus said to him, ""Get behind me, Satan! For it is written, 'You shall worship the Lord your God, and you shall serve him only.'"""
E ka' koni ñwaè' ce duè aègho duâ baè' aètútú, rraa li ku lo a bap embe buèu a suu mbe yeâ nduè.	As he traveled, it happened that he got close to Damascus, and suddenly a light from the sky shone around him.
Rkar mutù rli fyɛ̀pte.	The wheel has gone flat.
Beèe enjep ñgoèñ wááwá a ku ba aèmboè ñwáè entombïì ce a m boo neè nshe, beèe embe buèu a ku ba aèmboè ñwáè ce e m suèu embe buèu.	As is the one made of dust, such are those who are also made of dust; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly.
Ñwáè Jus moè' ce a m ce too ená AÈpoloès aè m vúâ aè rla' Áfásoès. A m bi ye aè rla' AÈláèksandaè. AÈ m ba ñwáè ce e m rïìñ aè rlaèa yuu, a riñ Ñwaâ' Nyúè boèñboñ foñ seê.	Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by race, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus. He was mighty in the Scriptures.
Woweèe a ka' baè' a ko' mbe rum ndap yïû mbekïì, mbe dïì' ce woweèe a m ce cu. Beèe ce a m ba mbo aè m ba Pitaè ba Joân ba Jáêms, ker ba Andruè ba Feleêp, ker ba Tomas ba Baètoèlomïì ba Matïìyoè ba Jáms muu Alfïìyoès ba Saimúèn ce e m ba moè' efa múè beèe Siloèt ba Judaès muu Jáêms.	When they had come in, they went up into the upper room, where they were staying; that is Peter, John, James, Andrew, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, and Judas the son of James.
Mboè yu woweèe ce a ce bepsi rlii rboèñboñ ce Jisoès aè m fa neè weèe na a?	Don't they blaspheme the honorable name by which you are called?
Njeñwáè ce wáè m yá naè, yu rla' rgoèr ce li ce sa' bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá.	"The woman whom you saw is the great city, which reigns over the kings of the earth."""
Pol aè m rïìñ ená beèe mo' embe kansuèr a yu Saduèsïî, beèe mo' a ba Farïìsïî, a laa neè ñgaâa kansuèr enáê, “Yaè beèe, m yu ñwáè Farïìsïî, a ba muu ñwáè Farïìsïî. M táá mbe kansuèr na aè mnsa' njo' m ce keè' ená beèe ce a kweñger a be keè fúú efa rkwe.”	"But when Paul perceived that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, ""Men and brothers, I am a Pharisee, a son of Pharisees. Concerning the hope and resurrection of the dead I am being judged!"""
Timotïì, táá yo yáánïì aè nfeè' wááwá, táá tatap aè nfeè' ñgá', gee rfaè' ce ñwáè ce e ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aè ba geèe, geèe rfaè' wááwá ce Nyúè aè fa neè wáè.	But you be sober in all things, suffer hardship, do the work of an evangelist, and fulfill your ministry.
Ñwáè bbaèa ce elúèsimbuèu ce Nyúè be keè so, yu rkwe.	The last enemy that will be abolished is death.
E m ba neè rbúè. A ka' káè' ce luuti, a ce war, njobeè' e m ce yu' ryañ.	She was with child. She cried out in pain, laboring to give birth.
Fa neè li ñgá', gee tá li koosimnse. Geèe neè tá ñgá' ba ñkoosimnse rla' anaè ku ba goèr foñ aèmboè ku' foèo ba ku' buu ce li m túr naè. Fa neè li ñgá' njobeè' li ce naèa tu ená li yu ñkúú. Li ce laèa ená li yu ñgwañkúñwáè ka', aède' li war aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	However much she glorified herself, and grew wanton, so much give her of torment and mourning. For she says in her heart, 'I sit a queen, and am no widow, and will in no way see mourning.'
Ñwáè anaè aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, máè láè mncir ca wááwá káâ' aè nfeè' ce máè m ba muu ñká'.”	"He said to him, ""Teacher, I have observed all these things from my youth."""
A m baè' mbo, Jisoès aè kupseè a ba aè njáâá jáá, vi bsii vi raa aèmboè nyúè, vi bcáè' vi ce laè'ñger.	He was transfigured before them. His face shone like the sun, and his garments became as white as the light.
Yi ku ba neè seèe wa' foñ. AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce seèe aè m be riñ buu Nyúè boèñboñ ka' naè, seèe aè ce faè' bkwaèa neè byú' enjep ñgoèñ na.	So we also, when we were children, were held in bondage under the elemental principles of the world.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce bip ca neè weèe. Yiseèe ncir yi byemi ená seèe gee ba yuu boèñboñ nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè káè yuu bebep? Yi byemi ená seèe ja' ñwáè jaè' káè ená seèe yú ñwáè yú?”	"Then Jesus said to them, ""I will ask you something: Is it lawful on the Sabbath to do good, or to do harm? To save a life, or to kill?"""
Nashoèn aè ba muu AÈminadaèp, AÈminadaèp aè ba muu AÈdimïìn, AÈdimïìn aè ba muu Arnïì, Arnïì aè ba muu Hásroèn, Hásroèn aè ba muu Páráès, Páráès aè ba muu Judaè,	the son of Amminadab, the son of Aram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
Beèe mo' goèr se a ker byemi neè ye njobeè' buu ce e m suñ woweèe.	Many more believed because of his word.
Fa túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè mghaèghar cicïì ka'. Mi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè Nyúè ka'. Yá'ni yoè nyor aè rcu ba rcu ce Nyúè koèñ.	But refuse profane and old wives' fables. Exercise yourself toward godliness.
“Tá buu ca ka' koni, a be koo weèe fa weèe ñgá', duè neè weèe aè mndap mloo, fa weèe aè bshañ, duè neè weèe njeptii bkúú ba bgovanoè njo' máè.	But before all these things, they will lay their hands on you and will persecute you, delivering you up to synagogues and prisons, bringing you before kings and governors for my name's sake.
baná weèe aè duèñshi jáá jáá a weâe mú, a lá weêe mnyor aè ñgaâa nsa' mnsa' beèe neè mntee bbebep.	haven't you shown partiality among yourselves, and become judges with evil thoughts?
E ka' laèa wa'a, a tuu Timotïì ba ÁÈrastoès ce a m ce jaè' ye aè li rfaè', ená a du aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè, a biishi yi aè ñgoâñ Áshaè.	Having sent into Macedonia two of those who served him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “M túr njáèá byee mo' ce weèe rïìñ ka'.”	"But he said to them, ""I have food to eat that you don't know about."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Duè, muu woè be kwe ka'.” Ñwáâ ñgoèr anaè aè byemïì yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa, a nati a ce kúti.	"Jesus said to him, ""Go your way. Your son lives."" The man believed the word that Jesus spoke to him, and he went his way."
doc mmbɛ̀mbɛɛ [m̩ mbɛ̀-mbɛ́ː] n 6.	sweet sourly herbs usually eaten raw.
ba beâe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ba beâe aè ñgoâñ IÌdumïìyaè ba mla' mo' ce mi m ba aèñguu rdip Jodaèn, ker ba Tayaè ba Sidoèn. Woweèe a m vúè magoèr se aè ryá ye njo' njáèá mfaè' ce woweèe a m yu' ená e m ce geèe.	from Jerusalem, from Idumaea, beyond the Jordan, and those from around Tyre and Sidon. A great multitude, hearing what great things he did, came to him.
E ku jɛr mimjiʼ e àfa a baʼ nje Nàgiryà.	He travelled from here to Nigeria alone.
Sataèn aè ka' moèoshi ye aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá mïìsi, a ma'shi ye a duê, ená nfeè' moè' e gháá, tá e ka' keèr kúti.	When the devil had completed every temptation, he departed from him until another time.
È m bee vʉ̂ àfa.	He had once come here.
Weèr aè m yá wáè ba aè se'ká, wáè ba kïìloè, weèr aè konïì wáè, káè wáè ba mbuèuriñ, weèr aè fa wáè bcáè'?	When did we see you as a stranger, and take you in; or naked, and clothe you?
Bfúr waê, m ce mïìsi ya ñwaè' ca a ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe cu boèñboñ. Gheèter neè kupse, ba yáánïì. Yu' neè yuu ce m ce laèa. Túr neè ntee e mo'sir, cu neè neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, Nyúè ce rkoèñnïì li ke loè ese ye, cumúnyañ lo ese ye foñ naè ba weèe woweèe.	Finally, brothers, rejoice. Be perfected, be comforted, be of the same mind, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Yi yu foñ ená aè m ba aè nfeè' seèe aè m ce cu naè, máè m ka' ba buu yuu, m ke' ba ntáèr neè ñwáè moè' ka'. Beèe ce a m vúè embe cor aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè a m fa máè buu ce máè m túr ka'. Máè m laèa máná weèe la' máè ka', m be keè laèa máná weèe la' máè ka', faè dïì' m bo ba ntáèr neè weèe ka'.	When I was present with you and was in need, I wasn't a burden on anyone, for the brothers, when they came from Macedonia, supplied the measure of my need. In everything I kept myself from being burdensome to you, and I will continue to do so.
Le rboèñ li ba ba enjep ntee, ba neè rbornïì-ñwáè, ba neè rfúteè enjep ntee. Njáèá rboèñ ca li ke kwe ncoèo ka', a boñ aè bsii Nyúè seê.	but in the hidden person of the heart, in the incorruptible adornment of a gentle and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God very precious.
Woweèe a m laèa wa'a, a ce moèoshi ye ená e ka' faa nlaèa, tá a bo rïìñ yuu ce a be geèe neè ye. Jisoès aè be'tïì nyor aè nsheè a ká' a ce sañ yuu aè nsheè neè ntubo.	They said this testing him, that they might have something to accuse him of. But Jesus stooped down, and wrote on the ground with his finger.
Àdeʼ ŋwɛ̀ ghaʼ njɛ̀ɛ kaʼ.	Nobody can be above the clan.
a lá njep li rsheâ rfi ce e m soè' nje ryáá, a biñsi ma luèr, a cete ncuâu rsheè aègho, a nati a duê.	and laid it in his own new tomb, which he had cut out in the rock, and he rolled a great stone to the door of the tomb, and departed.
a yop se enáê, “Muu Njeèe ce a m sáá naè aè ghááte aè rkoni ñger ba ku' buu ba bfee. E ghááte aè ñwáè ce a ba kuè'si ye, yoèñshi ye.”	"saying with a loud voice, ""Worthy is the Lamb who has been killed to receive the power, wealth, wisdom, strength, honor, glory, and blessing!"""
Jisoès aè m laèa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Buu ce aède' vi gee ñwáè gee yuu bebep vi be kuè ce vúè, geewa'a, ndoèo be co' ñwáè ce buu anaè vi ka' vú njo' ye.	"He said to the disciples, ""It is impossible that no occasions of stumbling should come, but woe to him through whom they come!"
Mbaʼce à tɛti a lip Nfò.	A branch has cut and hit Nfor.
M ce fa yi ryoèñ ce nfeseè, tá yi ker kwe aè nfeè' moè' ka'. AÈde' ñwáè moè' fúr yi emba máâ mmboè ka'.	I give eternal life to them. They will never perish, and no one will snatch them out of my hand.
E mʉ sɛni gwè.	He almost fell.
Woweèe a be geèe neè weèe wa'a njobeè' máè, ker ba foñ njobeè' woweèe a rïìñ ñwáè ce e m tuu máè ka'.	But all these things will they do to you for my name's sake, because they don't know him who sent me.
Jisoès aè bipshïì neè ye enáê, “AÈmboè beèe ce a ba ke'se a ba ba beèe nrúú a? Beèe mbúè'ú a yu ba fá?	"Jesus answered, ""Weren't the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?"
E m̀ vʉ̀ haʼntìni.	She came last week.
ce yoñshi Nyúè Taèr ce e yu yïìseèe ta aè nfeè' wááwá. Yu ye ce e geèe weèe aè ghááteè aè rkoni ñgúè' moè' efa buu ce e kupshi a lá neè yïì beèe mbe dïû' kúú ce yu dïû' rraa.	giving thanks to the Father, who made us fit to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light;
Yèe mbʉ à zhe kwâa.	Your goat has eaten corn.
Mbʉ zhi ce zhe mjɛɛ.	The goats are eating the grass.
geewa'a, ñwáè aè ke' ba ce aède' e yá'nïì li rlee tá li ku ce laèa ba buu bboèñboñ ka'. Rlee yu njáèá yuu bebep mo' ce yi ke koèñ aè rcu múnyañ ka'. Li ke laèa yuu yi ba aèmboè nli' ce aède' e yú ñwáè wa'a.	But nobody can tame the tongue. It is a restless evil, full of deadly poison.
Ŋwɛɛ Mbèŋ [ŋwɛ̄ː mbèŋ] cn 7.	month of March.
Nyúè ce e rïìñ yuu ce yi yu njep ntee ñwáè wááwá aè m duèñshi ená e m koo woweèe aè njáèá njïì ce e fa Yú' Rara neè woweèe aèmboè e m fa neè seèe foñ naè.	God, who knows the heart, testified about them, giving them the Holy Spirit, just like he did to us.
E ka' baè' aètútú cuâu ñka' aè rla' anaè, a yá aèmboè a byáè' gúâú ñwáè a ce fúú aègho. Ñwáè ce e m kwe anaè aè m ku ba muu mbañruè ce yïì ma aè m túr caè'caè'. Yïì ma ca aè m ba ñgwañkúñwáè. Kúr beèe efa rla' anaè ce yi m baè'ti yi m ba a ñgwañkúñwáè anaè weèe.	Now when he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, one who was dead was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. Many people of the city were with her.
Muu yïì anaè a ñwáè ce e geèe Nyúè aè foosïì yïìseèe buu bbebep, a tee seèe efa ñgá'.	in whom we have our redemption, the forgiveness of our sins;
A be lïìp ye neè byáánsoè, yú ye, mnoèñ vi ba btaar tá e fúú efa rkwe.”	"They will scourge and kill him. On the third day, he will rise again."""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná má máè foñ be suñ weèe ñwáè ce e fa máè ñger aè rgeèe buu ca ka'.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Neither will I tell you by what authority I do these things."""
A ce bèʼ bee ba à blee kaʼ.	People are not counted according to age.
Yi yu ená weèr aè m ku túr ñger ba njobeè' Taitoès aè m vúè ka, weèr m túr yi foñ njobeè' Taitoès aè m suñ weèr ená weèe aè m fa ye ñger. E m suñ weèr ená weèe ce koèñ aè ryá máè seê, a ker suñ máè ená weèe ce koosimnse aè yuu ce weèe aè m geèe. E m suñ weèr aèmboè weèe túr ntee aè rgeèe buu ce máè laèa. Máè ka' yu' buu ce e suñ anaè, a lu'shi neè weèe goèr seê.	and not by his coming only, but also by the comfort with which he was comforted in you, while he told us of your longing, your mourning, and your zeal for me; so that I rejoiced still more.
a laa neè beèe ce a m ce faè' neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè anaè yu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe. E fúú efa rkwe. A mbuèu ce e túr ñger aè rgeèe njáèá buu bghagha' ca.”	"and said to his servants, ""This is John the Baptizer. He is risen from the dead. That is why these powers work in him."""
Woweèe a m laèa wa'a, njobeè' yuu ce njeèndoñ anaè aè m laèa, yi m caèa yap ñger. Njeèndoñ anaè aè m laèa enáê, “Yuu mo' yi ka' joo rtuèu ca, káè yu ñwáè áè, káè yu nyaèa áè, baná a be túúshi neè bluèr tá e kwe.”	"for they could not stand that which was commanded, ""If even an animal touches the mountain, it shall be stoned;"""
Faèdïì' ce ñko'ndoñ ba bwer vi yu, baná beèe a be kuè ba bcuèu jáá jáá, keèr ce geèe njáèá buu bbebep wááwá.	For where jealousy and selfish ambition are, there is confusion and every evil deed.
Jisoès aè lor mntu' bráâd anaè, a yoñshi Nyúè, a gapshi neè beèe ce a m cute aè nsheè naè. A lor nca a gapshi neè woweèe foñ. Ñwáè wááwá aè ye a yu'.	Jesus took the loaves; and having given thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down; likewise also of the fish as much as they desired.
Fu' yi loè ce ko' embaè mbuèuñgoèñ, weèe laa weená ñgoèñ yi be luèu seê, yi ku luu ghup.	When a south wind blows, you say, 'There will be a scorching heat,' and it happens.
Ñwáè ka' túr buu enjep ñgoèñ na, yá ená nfúr yïì buu yuu, tee mmbo, aètaè rkoèñnïì Nyúè li ba njep ye aè njáâá ká?	But whoever has the world's goods, and sees his brother in need, and closes his heart of compassion against him, how does the love of God remain in him?
Wáè m ka' ba ba ñkwaèa aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m ká' wáè, aè fa bu' ka', ka' ba ne ená wáè koni fáñ aè rfúú efa bkwaèa, aè fúú yo yu.	Were you called being a bondservant? Don't let that bother you, but if you get an opportunity to become free, use it.
“Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ñwáè moè' ce e m fúú aè mú ñgaèptú' moè' a du a roèo beèe tá a bo faè' yi nsuu.	"For the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who was the master of a household, who went out early in the morning to hire laborers for his vineyard.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	2	A woweèe a m kapni ntaa rfaè', a byemïì ená e be laè' woweèe mbúè mbaèa aè noèñ, e tuu woweèe ená a du fa' yi nsuu.	When he had agreed with the laborers for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	3	AÈ ka' ba aèmboè nyúè búè'ú wa'a, e ker fúú a duê, a yá beèe mo' a tááteè aè ntaa, a túr yuu geèe ka',	He went out about the third hour, and saw others standing idle in the marketplace.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	4	e laa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Duè neè foñ du fa' ya nsuu tá m la' weèe aè ntaa yáánïì.’	To them he said, 'You also go into the vineyard, and whatever is right I will give you.' So they went their way.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	5	E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a duê. AÈ ka' ba aè nyúè ncoèp-baa ker ba aè nyúè taar, e ker duê, a yá beèe mo', a ker laa neè woweèe wa'a.	Again he went out about the sixth and the ninth hour, and did likewise.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	6	AÈ ka' ba aèmboè aè nyúè ta wa'a, e ker fúú a duê, a ker yá beèe mo' aèmboè a tááte aè ntaa, e laa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Weèe ku tááte mbena, nyúè aè ce coo, a ce geèe yuu ka' njoká?’	About the eleventh hour he went out, and found others standing idle. He said to them, 'Why do you stand here all day idle?'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	7	Woweèe a beesïì enáê, ‘Ñwáè moè' aè loèr weèr aè rfaè' ka'.’ E laa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Duè neè foñ du fa' ya nsuu.’	They said to him, 'Because no one has hired us.' ""He said to them, 'You also go into the vineyard, and you will receive whatever is right.'"
A mbuèu ce Nyúè aè naèa ye mbekïì, a fa ye rlii ce li caèa mlii wááwá,	Therefore God also highly exalted him, and gave to him the name which is above every name;
Baná aède' rlir li laa neè bo enáê, “M túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè wáè ka'” ka'. AÈde' tu foñ yi laa neè mkuèu enáê, “M túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè weèe ka'” ka'.	"The eye can't tell the hand, ""I have no need for you,"" or again the head to the feet, ""I have no need for you."""
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Beèe ce a ke roèo ñwáè mcáèp e ke ba ñgaâa byañ, ke' ba beâe btatap ka'.	"Jesus answered them, ""Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do."
Njeñwáè ca aè beesïì enáê, “Yi yu mini wa'a, Tataê, to ñgwe yi ke ye mkúè' baa boo ce mi gweèñger foñ.”	"But she answered him, ""Yes, Lord. Yet even the dogs under the table eat the children's crumbs."""
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca neè beèe anaè mïìsi, a du aè rla' Kaèpanuèm.	After he had finished speaking in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè fúr yïì ñwáè rfaè' efa weâe mú, a tuu ye neè weèe entombïì, tá e bo ghoèni weèe, geèe tá weèe kupse, maè' wee bsaèrbuu.”	"God, having raised up his servant, Jesus, sent him to you first, to bless you, in turning away everyone of you from your wickedness."""
Yuu mo'sir ce m ce roèo, a ce keè' máná yi koni neè máè yi yu ená m fa keè geèe yuu ce yi be koosi máè rïìtu ka'. Yi yu ená m túr ba ntee tatap seè'ni aèmboè máè m ku túr naè aè nfeè' sïìp tá m bo kuè fa rlii rgoèr neè Jisos Kraâis neè yaè nyor. Káè m be cu nteèe áè, káè m be kwe áè, m ku ce roèo ba aè rfa rlii rgoèr neè ye.	according to my earnest expectation and hope, that I will in no way be disappointed, but with all boldness, as always, now also Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life, or by death.
Maè'shi neè tá Nyúè kupse wee mntee tá weèe bo túr mkwaè'shïû mfi.	and that you be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
Woowèe a dù à ryɛ yàp ŋwɛ̀.	They have gone to see their person.
Woweèe a ka' yu' ená Máèári aè yá ye e cu nteèe naè, woweèe a byemïì ka'.	When they heard that he was alive, and had been seen by her, they disbelieved.
E m tuu woweèe ená woweèe a du fe'shi aèmboè kúú Nyúè, ker gee tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se.	He sent them forth to preach the Kingdom of God, and to heal the sick.
Cena yi ka' mïì wáá, Jisoès aè riñ seè'ni ená li rfaè' li mïì. E m laèa enáê, “Ntee yi ce yuushi máè.” E m laèa wa'a tá yi bo ghááte aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè.	"After this, Jesus, seeing that all things were now finished, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, ""I am thirsty."""
E ka' laèa wa'a, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a riñ seè'ni ená e ba ce laèa neè woweèe ená AÈlajaè aè vúè wáá wa'a, a ce laèa ba aèmboè Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe.	Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them of John the Baptizer.
Weèe aè ka' ce kaè' aè rgeèe yuu, weèe aè ba laèa ba enáê, “Tata ka' byemi baná seèe be geèe ca ba ca.”	"For you ought to say, ""If the Lord wills, we will both live, and do this or that."""
Ñwáè moè' ce e m ba ñwáè yá'ni yïì buu foñ, aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, maè'shi tá m du tuñ yaè ta wáá.”	"Another of his disciples said to him, ""Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father."""
Seèe ku lá miseèe mmir ba mbenduè Jisoès ce e m múè' njïì ená seèe lá ntee njep ye, aè ku ba ye ce e be keè loèr seèe duè aègho mbe buèu aèlúèsimbuèu. E m byemi a kwe rkwe rïìtu mbe kïìntaa. E m loèr rïìtu anaè aè yuu ka', tá e bo túr njáèá rlu'shïì ce Nyúè aè m kupshi a lá neè ye. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e m geèe wa'a, e cu seè'ni aè bo maè' kaèbaèraè' yïû Nyúè.	looking to Jesus, the author and perfecter of faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the cross, despising its shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' weèe aè ba aènjïìsaèp ese Nyúè, a ba ñgaâa bbaèa neè ye, njobeè' weèe aè m ce kwaè'shi buu bbebep, a ce geèe buu bbebep.	You, being in past times alienated and enemies in your mind in your evil works,
Beèe moè' a ce loèr ená noâñ mo' yu noâñ goèr a caa mnoèñ wááwá, beèe mo' a lor yap ená mnoèñ wááwá vi ku ba yáánïì. Ñwáè wááwá aè ba kwaè'shi, rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená yuu ce e ce kwaè'shi yi yu yáánïì.	One man esteems one day as more important. Another esteems every day alike. Let each man be fully assured in his own mind.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba beèe Farïìsi a ka' yu' mñgaèa ce e maè', a riñ ená e maè' mñgaèa anaè ba aèmboè woweèe.	When the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they perceived that he spoke about them.
Jodaè aè ba muu Joanaèm, Joanaèm aè ba muu Rásaè, Rásaè aè ba muu Sáèrobabáèr, Sáèrobabáèr aè ba muu Shálatáèr, Shálatáèr aè ba muu Nárïì,	the son of Joanan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
Pitaè aè suu a yá woweèe, a laa enáê, “A máè ñwáè ce weèe ce roèo naè. Weèe aè vúè aè rroèo máè ená ká?”	"Peter went down to the men, and said, ""Behold, I am he whom you seek. Why have you come?"""
AÈ m ba entoèmbïì, weèe aè tee btu neè Nyúè, aè ka' ba seè'ni, Nyúè aè koosïìmnse neè weèe njobeè' nteèetu beèe Isráèl.	For as you in time past were disobedient to God, but now have obtained mercy by their disobedience,
Nyúè e ke fa woweèe njáèá ñger ca njobeè' e koèñ bjep ka'. E koèñ beèe ce a túr cumúnyañ. AÈmboè yi yu aè bcor wááwá, baná wee bbyeèñge a ka' niñ coêr, a fa laèa yuu ka', njobeè' ncir Nyúè yi byemi ená woweèe a ka' niñ coêr, a lor yaèp nyor njep nsheè aèmboè ncir Nyúè yi laèa.	for God is not a God of confusion, but of peace. As in all the assemblies of the saints, let your wives keep silent in the assemblies, for it has not been permitted for them to speak; but let them be in subjection, as the law also says.
A ka' laèa wa'a, a ce ye neè mce nje mmïìr, a túúshi ye neè bdúè'. Beèe mo' a lip ye neè mmbo,	Then they spit in his face and beat him with their fists, and some slapped him,
Zhisèe ŋgʉp zhi kweŋger e.	Our fowls are dead.
Yu njo' Jisoès ce seèe wááwá aè túr yú' e mo'sir, a koni fáñ aè rtáá aè bsii Taèr.	For through him we both have our access in one Spirit to the Father.
E beesïì enáê, “Yi boèñ ená a lor byee boo ma' neè ñgwe ka'.”	"But he answered, ""It is not appropriate to take the children's bread and throw it to the dogs."""
Beèe ncoèp-baa-aè-msaèamba caè a du a kúti neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè a laa enáê, “Tataê, mnyúâmkaè' foñ a yu'ni neè weèr njo' lo rlii.”	"The seventy returned with joy, saying, ""Lord, even the demons are subject to us in your name!"""
Nyúè Taèr aè m rïìñ weèe wáá, a ka' ce weèe, yi yú' yi gee weèe aè ba brara, tá weèe bo yu'ni neè Jisos Kraêis, tá Nyúè ñwañshi weèe neè bláá Jisoès. M ce loo máná Nyúè túr ntee boèñboñ neè weèe seê, ker gee tá weèe cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè boèñboñ seê.	according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, that you may obey Jesus Christ and be sprinkled with his blood: Grace to you and peace be multiplied.
AÈ ka ba njobeè' weèe aè túr ba ñgeâe fi seè'ni na, jáá jáèá jáá ker ba fa weâe mú ka'. Jus a yu jáá efa beèe enje jáá ka'. Beèe ce a geèe búè a yu jáá efa beèe ce a yu mbáè'nsúèr ka'. Ñwáâ aè rïìñ yu jáá ka'. Nfuu bkaè' a yu jáá ka. Jáá jáèá jáá yu aègho mbetar bkwaèa ba boo ka'. Woweèe wááwá a ku ba byáánïì njobeè' a ce yá seè'ni ba Jisos Kraêis, aè ba ye ce e túr beèe wááwá.	where there can't be Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondservant, freeman; but Christ is all, and in all.
Beèe ce a m ba yap entombïì naè, a lapnïì ye a laa ená e cu nyañ. E ker misi yi yu a waa goèr a laa enáê, “Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè máè.”	"Those who led the way rebuked him, that he should be quiet; but he cried out all the more, ""You son of David, have mercy on me!"""
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Weèe yi yuu ce weèe ce bipshi ka'. AÈde' weèe no enjep ndoñ ce m be no enjo a?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “AÈde' weèr no enjo.”	"But Jesus answered, ""You don't know what you are asking. Are you able to drink the cup that I am about to drink, and be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with?"" They said to him, ""We are able."""
E m ba njep ñgoèñ. Ñgoèñ ca aè m geèe ye aè ñger Nyúè. Ñgoèñ yi m rïìñ ye ka'.	He was in the world, and the world was made through him, and the world didn't recognize him.
E be keè vúè aè noèñ anaè tá yïì beèe ce a byemi neè ye a ku'si ye keèr vúse ye. Weèe be keè ba aè múè beèe ca njobeè' weèe aè byemi blaâa Nyúè ce weèr aè m feè'shi neè weèe.	when he comes to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired among all those who have believed (because our testimony to you was believed) in that day.
Buu bïìr ce weèr ce maè' bïìr aègho yu ba buu bïìr enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Weèr ce maè' ba neè buu bïìr vïû Nyúè ce vi túr ñger, a ce saè'si bdïì' ce yer ñgaâa bbaèa a cu.	for the weapons of our warfare are not of the flesh, but mighty before God to the throwing down of strongholds,
Rïìñ neè ená Jisos Kraâis ce e yu ñwáè, yu yáánïì a Nyúè aè buu wááwá.	For in him all the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily,
E m yi yuu ce e laa ka' njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp seê.	For he didn't know what to say, for they were very afraid.
E ròo zhii mbàa cà, a yɛ.	She searched for her money and found it.
Beèe ñkwe Rum ca a m bipshi buu neè máè, a koñ aè rmaè'shi máè njobeè' máè m geèe yuu mo' ce a m ba yú máè aètu mo ka'.	who, when they had examined me, desired to set me free, because there was no cause of death in me.
“Kúú Nyúè yi yu foñ aèmboè rraa ce a m maè' njep roè, a koo nca njo njáèá jáá jáèá jáá.	"Again, the Kingdom of Heaven is like a dragnet, that was cast into the sea, and gathered some fish of every kind,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	48	Yi ka' ruu njo, ñgaâa ñkoo nca a súñ a ko'si mbe ñkúè, a cu aè nsheè, a capshi nca yïû boèñboñ a lá aè mñkaèa, a lor yïû bebep a ma'.	which, when it was filled, they drew up on the beach. They sat down, and gathered the good into containers, but the bad they threw away.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	49	A mboè yi be keèe ba wa'a aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì. Bcïìndap Nyúè a be keèe vúè, fúshi beâe bbebep efa múè beèe ce a yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè,	So will it be in the end of the world. The angels will come forth, and separate the wicked from among the righteous,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	50	maè' woweèe njep mor ce beèe a be keèe ce warse ce kúr msoèñ njo.”	and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth."
Nyúè aè túr woweèe aè ntee boèñboñ, a gee woweèe aè ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii. E m geèe wa'a neè woweèe aè cicïì. Jisoès Kraâis a ñwáè ce e m geèe ená yi ba wa'a, a tee seèe efa ñgá'.	being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus;
Noèñ elúèsimbuèu efa ñkaè' anaè aè m ba noâñ goèr. AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ anaè, Jisoès aè natïì mbekïì a laa neè ñger-ñwáè enáê, “Ntee yi ka' ce yuushi ñwáè, ñgaèñ vú yá máè, no yuu.	"Now on the last and greatest day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried out, ""If anyone is thirsty, let him come to me and drink!"
Ñger wááwá yi yu mbaè mmbo Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê. E yu seè'ni na. E m ba, aè ku ba ye ce e be keè vúè. E m laèa enáê, “A máè Alfaè a ker ba OÈmágaè.”	"I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord God, ""who is and who was and who is to come, the Almighty."""
Weèe rïìñ ñwáè ce weâe ke loo neè ye ka'. Weèr rïìñ ñwáè ce wer ke loo neè ye njobeè' rluèñ li ke loè ba ese Juês.	You worship that which you don't know. We worship that which we know; for salvation is from the Jews.
Beèe mo' efa ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ká' a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “Yuu ce e laèa neè seèe na yi yu ba ená ká? E laèa enáê, ‘Nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè ka', e ba nfeè' múcaèr tá weèe yá máè’, a ker laa foñ enáê, ‘Njobeè' m ce duè aè ryá Taèr’ njoká?”	"Some of his disciples therefore said to one another, ""What is this that he says to us, 'A little while, and you won't see me, and again a little while, and you will see me;' and, 'Because I go to the Father?'"""
Ca a yoo bàa tàraʼwɛ̀ a?	Is this your personal bag?
Bcïìndap Nyúè saèamba ce a m vúè neè mñgá' saèamba naè a fúú embe dïì' Nyúè anaè. Woweèe a m yar bcáâ' bbúú ce vi m ce fúp seê. Woweèe a m cúú kúè cáè' ce a geèe neè gul nje ñguèñ.	The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out, clothed with pure, bright linen, and wearing golden sashes around their breasts.
E laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè.” Pitaè aè fúú embe keñ a jár mbenduè rdip a ce duè aè ryá Jisoès.	"He said, ""Come!"" Peter stepped down from the boat, and walked on the waters to come to Jesus."
Woweèe a ka' ce duè, a tarte a ñwáè moâ' aè rla' Saèireên, ce a m ce too ená Saimúèn. A koo ye aè ñger ená e byá' kïìntaa.	As they came out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name, and they compelled him to go with them, that he might carry his cross.
Mfaè' ce beèe a ke geèe mi ku ba jáá jáèá jáá foñ. Ka' yi yu wa'a, Tata Jisoès ce a ce faè' neè ye ku ba moè'sir.	There are various kinds of service, and the same Lord.
Woweèe a ka' yá ená weèe ker ce geèe ku' njáèá buu bbebep ce weèe woweèe aè m ce geèe naè ka', a bááñger, a ce cáp weèe.	They think it is strange that you don't run with them into the same excess of riot, blaspheming:
Fa báèáñger njobeè' máè laèa neè wáè ená a be kuè keèr bi ñwáè nfeè' baa ka'.	Don't marvel that I said to you, 'You must be born anew.'
AÈde' beèe a du fe'shi aè njáâá ká ce a ka' tá tuu woweèe ka'? Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Mkuèu beèe ce a vúè a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ mi boèñ aèmboè ká wa'a!”	"And how will they preach unless they are sent? As it is written: ""How beautiful are the feet of those who preach the Good News of peace, who bring glad tidings of good things!"""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Baènabaès aè natïì a du aè rla' Tasoès aè rroèo Soêl.	Barnabas went out to Tarsus to look for Saul.
Loo neè neè weèr. Weèr rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená yer ntee yi yu rara.	Pray for us, for we are persuaded that we have a good conscience, desiring to live honorably in all things.
E m yɛ yuu ŋkar zhì a gani.	She saw her friendʼs property and coveted it.
Jisoès aè ka' duè mbe ndaèp mbe Pitaè, a yá aèmboè malu yïì Pitaè noèñ, tu yi ce luu ye.	When Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother lying sick with a fever.
E ka' yá aèmboè beèe ce a m be naè a ce tañni aè rcu ba mbe mnta' bboèñboñ, e ma' ñgaèa neè woweèe enáê,	He spoke a parable to those who were invited, when he noticed how they chose the best seats, and said to them,
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' ñger ce Nyúè aè fa neè máè njo' yi ntee boèñboñ, m ce laèa neè weèe wááwá ená ñwáè fa kwaè'shi aèmboè yi tu, caèa embe dïì' ce e ba kwaè'shi ka'. Kwaè'shi aèmboè yo tu ba aè njïû yáánïì. Ñwáè wááwá ku kwa'shi aèmboè yi tu ba aèndeèe rbyemïì ce Nyúè aè fa ye.	For I say, through the grace that was given me, to every man who is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think reasonably, as God has apportioned to each person a measure of faith.
Beèe a m vúè neè bghaèrbeèe ená Jisoès bo joèo woweèe, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a lapnïì beèe anaè.	They were bringing to him little children, that he should touch them, but the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them.
Bfúr weêr, weèr ce koèñ ená weèe riñ yuu ce yi be loè koni beèe ce a kweñger wáá naè, faè dïì' weèe bo ce koosimnse aèmboè beèe ce a ke keè' rcu ce nfeseè ka' naè ka'.	But we don't want you to be ignorant, brothers, concerning those who have fallen asleep, so that you don't grieve like the rest, who have no hope.
Nfúraè, njáèá rkoèñnïì ce aè túr neè beèe Nyúè li geèe máè ce lu'shi, a ker tapsi máè. Wáè koèñ woweèe wa'a, a gee wap mntee vi fúteè.	For we have much joy and comfort in your love, because the hearts of the saints have been refreshed through you, brother.
Woweèe a be keè laèa yuu kuèu yuu ce woweèe a ce geèe na neè ñwáè ce e tami nyor aè rsa' beèe ce a cu bteèe ker ba beèe ce a kweñger.	who will give account to him who is ready to judge the living and the dead.
AÈ m ba nyúè moè' Jisoès aè táá aèwaâa ma túâ Gáènásaráèt, kúr beèe a sir ye a kaari a tarte tá a bo yu' blaâa Nyúè.	Now it happened, while the multitude pressed on him and heard the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of Gennesaret.
Ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m ce laèa neè máè naè aè m túr mú co' saèsap ce a m geèe neè guêl. AÈ m ba co' ce a m ce feè' buu aègho. E m túr co' anaè tá e bo feè' rla' ca, feè' ñka' ce a boo a sir rla' ca aègho, keèr feè' bcuèu ñka' anaè.	He who spoke with me had for a measure, a golden reed, to measure the city, its gates, and its walls.
Weèe aè ka' ce sa' mnsa', weèe fa fyá' mmir beèe ka', weèe sa' teni yáánïì.”	"Don't judge according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment."""
Ŋwàʼ zhi nòŋ njeptii kìdàŋ.	The book is lying under the bench.
Seèe aè ka' gee wa'a, baná yi be geèe tá seèe yi ená seèe yu ñgaâa mini, keèr tapsi viseèe mntee aè bsii Nyúè	And by this we know that we are of the truth, and persuade our hearts before him,
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Wee weèe e ke fúú enjep mncir Nyúè njo' ndeèe weêe bta njoká?	"He answered them, ""Why do you also disobey the commandment of God because of your tradition?"
Nyúè aè ka' coo, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Seèe yu aènjïìsaèp efa mla', nyúè aè ce coo. Laèa tá beèe ca a duse aè mlaè' tá a bo duè yuu byee, ye.”	"When evening had come, his disciples came to him, saying, ""This place is deserted, and the hour is already late. Send the multitudes away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves food."""
Jisoès aè ka' ce niñ mbe keñ, ñwáè ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m fúú enjep ye naè aè loo ená e be duè a ye.	As he was entering into the boat, he who had been possessed by demons begged him that he might be with him.
ÁÈpafraès ce weèr ye aè niñ shañ bsïìp aètu Jisos Kraêis, aè caè'ni wáè.	Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, greets you,
Caè'ni neè AÈmplatoès ce e yu ñkaraè ce wa mntee, ce weèr ye yu aèbee weèr Tata weèe naè.	Greet Amplias, my beloved in the Lord.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè wáè ce aè yu ñwáè Nyúè, cañ efa gee buu ca. Láè ntee ce gee ba ñgeâe yáánïì, cu ba rcu ce Nyúè koèñ, lá ntee neè Nyúè, koñ beèe, táá tatap, ba múfáèá aè yo ñgeèe.	But you, man of God, flee these things, and follow after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and gentleness.
Woweèe a m fúr ye efa múè rla' a túúshi neè bluèr. Beèe ce a m táá njïìnsa' mbe kansuèr naè a m láè wap bcáè' njeptii mbañruèñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Soêl.	They threw him out of the city, and stoned him. The witnesses placed their garments at the feet of a young man named Saul.
Yáê, m be duè tá m tuusi yuu ce yaè Ta aè m kaè'ni naè neè weèe. Baná weèe cu aè rla' ca, caar tá ñger embe buèu yi suu mbe weâe nduè.”	"Behold, I send forth the promise of my Father on you. But wait in the city of Jerusalem until you are clothed with power from on high."""
Jisoès aè natïì a du aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, a ker du aè ñgoâñ neèñguu rdip Jodaèn. Ku' beèe a ker vúse aè ryá ye, e yá'ni woweèe aèmboè e m ku ce yá'ni beèe naè.	He arose from there and came into the borders of Judea and beyond the Jordan. Multitudes came together to him again. As he usually did, he was again teaching them.
Yi m ba yáánïì ená e beeñger ba aèmboè bfúr vi aè mnduunjïì wááwá, tá e bo ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce e be faè' neè Nyúè neè mini-ñwáè, koosimnse neè beèe, tá e bo maa yaèp buu bbebep.	Therefore he was obligated in all things to be made like his brothers, that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things pertaining to God, to make atonement for the sins of the people.
Tanyʉ̀ à fʉr muu embe ŋwàʼ.	Tanyu has removed the child from school.
A ker ba foñ, “Luèr ce beèe a ce kote aègho, a ce gweèñger.” Woweèe a ce kote aègho njobeè' woweèe a byemi Nlaâa Nyúè ka'. Nyúè aè m geèe ená yi ba wa'a.	"and, ""a stone of stumbling, and a rock of offense."" For they stumble at the word, being disobedient, to which also they were appointed."
Gheèter vú ghaèagheèr vú yá máè,	Be diligent to come to me soon,
E ka' ye, baná wáè ce wáè túr bfee naè, wáè bepsi nfúroè ce Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe neè ye.	And through your knowledge, he who is weak perishes, the brother for whose sake Christ died.
M ce koèñ máná m caasi yoè nfeè' ka', a ce bu' mmbo neè wáè ená aè fa mú nfeè' moè', yu' yuu ce weèr be suñ wáè.	But, that I don't delay you, I entreat you to bear with us and hear a few words.
E m ker laa neè woweèe foñ enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè cú' laêm, lor ghee kúpshi aègho, káè tár mbaè kaèasi a? AÈmboè e be tár ba mbe dïì' ce lam e ke táá a?	"He said to them, ""Is the lamp brought to be put under a basket or under a bed? Isn't it put on a stand?"
E beesïì a laa neè ñwáè anaè enáê, “Yaè ma yu nda, bfúr wa aè ba weèe ká?”	"But he answered him who spoke to him, ""Who is my mother? Who are my brothers?"""
M rïìñ máná yuu boèñboñ mo' yi yu njep máâ ntee ka', m ce laèa ba buu ce m ce koèñ aèmboè ñwáè. Ntee aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ yi yu njep rbúè, mmbo aè rgeèe yuu anaè mi ba ka'.	For I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing. For desire is present with me, but I don't find it doing that which is good.
Ñwáè moè' e ke rïìñ yuu ce ñwáè moè' ce kwaè'shi ka'. E ke kuâ rïìñ ñwáè yuu ce yi yu njep yeâ ntee. Yi ku ba foñ ená aède' ñwáè moè' riñ yuu ce Nyúè ce kwaè'shi ka'. Ku ba ba Yú' Nyúè ce yi rïìñ yuu ce Nyúè ce kwaè'shi.	For who among men knows the things of a man, except the spirit of the man, which is in him? Even so, no one knows the things of God, except God's Spirit.
Woweèe a beesïì ka', njobeè' woweèe a m ce sár ená ñwáè ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr efa woweèe a nda lá?	But they were silent, for they had disputed one with another on the way about who was the greatest.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Jakoèp aè m ce kwe, rbyemïì li m geèe e ghonïì boo mmbañruè a baa ce Josáèf aè m túr. AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' anaè e too nyor aè mbaèñ a gú'shi neè Nyúè.	By faith, Jacob, when he was dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and worshiped, leaning on the top of his staff.
Yi yu boèñboñ ená weèe kur ntee tá weèe bo geèe yuu ce Nyúè koèñ, koni yuu ce e kaè' ená e be fa weèe naè.	For you need endurance so that, having done the will of God, you may receive the promise.
Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Muu Nyúè, yu ñwáè ce e ke byemi ker kani ka'. Yu ye ce weèr Timotïì ba Silaès aè m ce feè'shi aèmboè ye aè nfeè' ce weèr aè m ba a weâe mú naè. E yu ñwáè ce e ce duèñshi ená Nyúè e ke laèa ená áèno, ku táá ba njo,	"For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, by me, Silvanus, and Timothy, was not ""Yes and no,"" but in him is ""Yes."""
Yuu ce m ce laèa yi yu ená weèe ma'shi tá Yú' Nyúè yi ke'ni weèe faè dïì' weèe bo geèe ba yuu ce yeè nyor ce koèñ ka'.	But I say, walk by the Spirit, and you won't fulfill the lust of the flesh.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè m ba aèbee naè, Nyúè aè fa weèe njáèá ncoèo moè' ce e ce duèñshi ená weèe yu yïì beèe. Ncoèo anaè yu ba búè ce a geèe neè mmbo aèmboè Jus a ce geèe naè ka', yu ba njáèá ncoèo yïì Jisos Kraêis. Njáèá ncoèo ca yu ba ncoèo enjep ntee, ce e yu ená weèe bii geèe buu bbebep aèmboè weèe aè m ce geèe naè ka'.	in whom you were also circumcised with a circumcision not made with hands, in the putting off of the body of the sins of the flesh, in the circumcision of Christ;
Tá yi ñger yi cu nfeseè. Yi yu wa'a.	To him be the glory and the power forever and ever. Amen.
Máâ Poêl, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe. Beèe a ce laèa ená má ke ba a weâe mú ce wáp, e ba aè nfeè' m yu aèfo ka', m sañ ñwaè' tatap neè weèe. M ce loo neè weèe aè rlii Jisoès ce e túr rbonïì, a ba múnyañ ená,	Now I Paul, myself, entreat you by the humility and gentleness of Christ; I who in your presence am lowly among you, but being absent am bold toward you.
Weèe fa kuè ce faè' ba aè nfeè' ce woweèe a ce yá weèe tá woweèe a bo yu' rboèñ neè weèe ka'. Weèe aè ba kuushi ba ená weèe yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Kraêis, loèr ye ntee wááwá geèe ba yuu ce Nyúè koèñ.	not in the way of service only when eyes are on you, as men pleasers; but as servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart;
Mɛ̀ bip muunje anà e byemì mɛ̀.	I requested that girl (for marriage) (and) she accepted.
To' Sodoèm ba to' Goèmoraè foñ, ker ba mla' ce mi m ba aègee bto' ca a m ce geèe bsaèrbuu, a ce geèe mnyáâr seê. Woweèe a ce yá ñgá' njep mor ce aède' yi liitïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Cena yi ce duèñshi seèe yuu ce yi be koni neè beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe anaè foñ.	Even as Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, having, in the same way as these, given themselves over to sexual immorality and gone after strange flesh, are set forth as an example, suffering the punishment of eternal fire.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Wáná aè be kwe njo' máè lá! M ce suñ wáè neè mini- ñwáè ená tá nduñgúp ka' toñ, aè be kani ená aè rïìñ máè ka' ñkaèraè' taar.	"Jesus answered him, ""Will you lay down your life for me? Most certainly I tell you, the rooster won't crow until you have denied me three times."
“AÈde' ñwáè cú' laêm, ker lor ghee kúpshi aègho káè tár mbaè kaèasi ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' cú' laêm, baná ñgaèñ be tár ba mbe tábuèr, tá beèe ce a ce niñ mbe ndaèp a bo yá rraa.	"No one, when he has lit a lamp, covers it with a container, or puts it under a bed; but puts it on a stand, that those who enter in may see the light.
Luke	Luêk	8	17	Yi yu foñ ená yuu mo' yi yu ce a súèti ce yi be keè buu efa ryááti aèwañ ka'. Yuu mo' yi yu ce a tá'shi ce a be keè buu efa rrïìñ tá yi yááti aèwañ ka'.	For nothing is hidden, that will not be revealed; nor anything secret, that will not be known and come to light.
Luke	Luêk	8	18	Baná weèe lor nfeè' aè njáèá njïì ce weèe ce yu' buu. Ñwáè ce e ka' túr yuu baná a be fa ye buu moè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr yuu ka', baná a be koo ka' mú yïì ce e ce kwaè'shi ená e túr naè ese ye.”	Be careful therefore how you hear. For whoever has, to him will be given; and whoever doesn't have, from him will be taken away even that which he thinks he has."
Beèe mo' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoâs aè rla' Sisaèriyaè anaè a du weèr woweèe, a lor weèr a du aègho mbe ndaèp Nasïìn ce e m ba ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Saiproès. A ñwáè ce weèr aè m ce duè aè rcu weèr woweèe. E m ba moè' efa beèe entombïì ce a m byemi neè Jisoès.	Some of the disciples from Caesarea also went with us, bringing one Mnason of Cyprus, an early disciple, with whom we would stay.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa woweèe yuu tá a ye.” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr ku túr ba mntu' bráâd vi taê, ba nca yi baa. Baná weèr du yuu byee neè ku' beèe ca wááwá a?”	"But he said to them, ""You give them something to eat."" They said, ""We have no more than five loaves and two fish, unless we should go and buy food for all these people."""
moè' aè ba Joèanaè ce e m ba ñgwa Kusaè ce e m ba tu rfaè' embe ndaèp Hároèd. Suèsanaè aè ba moè' foñ, ker ba bbyeèñge mo' aèñgoo. Bbyeèñge ca a m jaè' Jisoès weèe neè yap mbaèa ba yaèp buu ce a m túr.	and Joanna, the wife of Chuzas, Herod's steward; Susanna; and many others; who served them from their possessions.
Nteèendúñ ca aè ku ce caèa, a ce fa weèr ñgá' seê. Túè' aè ka' raa, woweèe a ká' a ce fúshi buu embe keñ a ce maè'ri njep roè.	As we labored exceedingly with the storm, the next day they began to throw things overboard.
máè kwe. Máè yá máná mncir ce a m fa tá beèe a bo koni ryoèñ naè, vi geèe máè kwe kwe.	The commandment, which was for life, this I found to be for death;
AÈmboè weèe aè rïìñ buu ca wáá na, weèe ku ce gee boèñboñ aèmboè weèe ce geèe naè. Ñwáè wááwá efa weâe mú fa ñger neè nfúr moè', ja' nfúr moè' tá e táá tatap.	Therefore exhort one another, and build each other up, even as you also do.
Ka' seèe rïìñ wa'a, ñwáè lor nfeè' faè dïì' njáèá ñger ce Nyúè aè m fa neè ye ená e ye buu naè, yi lo geèe tá bfúr mo' ce map mkwaè'shïì mi ce fa woweèe ñgá' naè, a lo gweè ka'.	But be careful that by no means does this liberty of yours become a stumbling block to the weak.
Yáê, nfeè' ce gháá, e gháá wáá, ce weèe be da'se, tá ñwáè wááwá kúti fa yeâ laè', maè'shi máè mamñgi'. M be ba mamñgi' ka', njobeè' Taèr ku ba weèr ye.	Behold, the time is coming, yes, and has now come, that you will be scattered, everyone to his own place, and you will leave me alone. Yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
“Múè' neè wee btuè', yu' yuu ce m ce suñ weèe na boèñboñ. A be loèr Muu Ñwáè fa mbaè mmbo beèe.”	Let these words sink into your ears, for the Son of Man will be delivered up into the hands of men.
Mbèŋ be kù gwè àbnòŋ ca.	It will rain one of these days.
Yi yu aètáèr neè kaèmál aè rtose nje rlir nsaèraè' neè ñwáè mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	"For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of God."""
Caè'ni Prïûskaè ba AÈkwilaè ker ba beèe embe ndaèp OÈnisiforoès.	Greet Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ce aè yu ñwáè ryá'nïû aè to' Isráèl, wáè rïìñ buu ca ka' a?”	"Jesus answered him, ""Are you the teacher of Israel, and don't understand these things?"
Geewa'a, yi yu aètáèr neè rbuu ba nshe aè rmïì, neè yïì ce ená a co' mbúè nlaèa moè' embe Ñwaè' Mncir.	But it is easier for heaven and earth to pass away, than for one tiny stroke of a pen in the law to fall.
E fa vi njo' bee ce a ce saèki, ba mmbañruè ce a ce noèñ a mmbañruè mo', ba beèe ce a ce yáèá beèe ce fyeèni aè bkwaèa, ba ñgaâa nya' mnde', ker ba ñgaâa ntáá njïìnsa' mnaèñ, ker ba njáèá ñgeèe wááwá ce beèe a ce geèe yi ba jáá efa ryá'nïì mini.	for the sexually immoral, for homosexuals, for slave-traders, for liars, for perjurers, and for any other thing contrary to the sound doctrine;
Woweèe a ce laèa wa'a, ñkúú beesi neè woweèe enáê, ‘M ce suñ weèe neè mini- ñwáè ená aèmboè weèe aè m geèe buu ca neè ñwáâ ñká' efa múè bfúr wa ca na, weèe aè m geèe ba neè máè.’	"The King will answer them, 'Most certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you did it to one of the least of these my brothers, you did it to me.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	41	E laèa wa' mïìsi, laa neè beâe aè bo ñkoèp enáê, ‘Ndoèo aè co' weèe, loè neè efa máâ geñ, du njep mor ce aède' yi liitïì ka', ce a toèo neè Sataèn ba vi bcïìndap,	Then he will say also to those on the left hand, 'Depart from me, you cursed, into the eternal fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	42	njobeè' njeè aè m ce yañ máè, weèe aè fa máè byee ka'. Ntee yi m ce yuushi máè, weèe aè fa máè yuu no ka'.	for I was hungry, and you didn't give me food to eat; I was thirsty, and you gave me no drink;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	43	Máè m ba kïìloè, weèe aè konïì máè ka', a ba mbuèuriñ, weèe aè fa máè bcáè' ka', a ce yañ a ker ba mbe shañ, weèe aè ca'nïì máè ka'.’	I was a stranger, and you didn't take me in; naked, and you didn't clothe me; sick, and in prison, and you didn't visit me.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	44	E laèa wa'a, woweèe a bipshi neè ye enáê, ‘Tataê, weèr aè m yá wáè aè se'ká, njeè aè ce yañ wáè, káè ntee yi ce yuushi wáè, káè wáè ba kïìloè, káè wáè ba mbuèuriñ, káè wáè ba mbe shañ áè, a ke' ja' wáè ka'?’	Then they will also answer, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, or thirsty, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and didn't help you?'"
M ce wɛp enɛ m̀ be gwè njep rò.	I am afraid that I will fall into the stream.
Woweèe a m yu' ncep ce e m fa, a ka' ká' ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès, a lip woweèe, a laa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fa keèr laèa yuu mo' aè rlii Jisoès ka'. A ka' laèa wa'a, a ma'shi woweèe ená woweèe a duê.	They agreed with him. Summoning the apostles, they beat them and commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and let them go.
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ máná weèe riñ ená yu nfeè' magoèr ce má ke loè kwa'shi ená m vú yá weèe. caar ba' ntïìni na, máâ kwaè'shi wa'a, yuu mo' yi ku jepsi máè. M ce koèñ aè rgeèe tá beèe a byemi neè Jisoès tá la rfaè' li ba neè sá'-ñwáè a weâe mú aèmboè li yu neè beèe enje jáá foñ naè.	Now I don't desire to have you unaware, brothers, that I often planned to come to you, and was hindered so far, that I might have some fruit among you also, even as among the rest of the Gentiles.
Ñwáè moè' aè m be yá Nyúè ka'. Seèe ka' koñni, Nyúè cu njep seèe, seèe koñnïì seê, du misïî.	No one has seen God at any time. If we love one another, God remains in us, and his love has been perfected in us.
A be ruusi mntoèñ wááwá, káèáshi mtuèu wááwá tá mi kúti mmbo'. A be naèshi mnduunjïì ce vi gooñger tá vi ba kuèyáá, kupshi vïì ce vi yu koteè-koteè tá vi ba nfáâñ.	Every valley will be filled. Every mountain and hill will be brought low. The crooked will become straight, and the rough ways smooth.
Njè à koo mɛ̀ banɛ m̀ be dù boŋ bzhee.	I am starving, so I will go and beg food.
Ñwáè wááwá efa weâe mú cep yi tu tá e bo geèe ba yuu ce Nyúè koèñ ená e gee neè yïì nyor, aè ba yuu ce beèe wááwá a ce yu' rboèñ aègho.	that each one of you know how to possess himself of his own vessel in sanctification and honor,
Ñwáè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè' naè aè laa enáê, “Yáê, m be geèe ba buu bfi seè'ni.” E m ker laa enáê, “Sañ blaèa ca njobeè' yu blaèa ce aède' vi caa aè cicïì ka', vi yu mini.”	"He who sits on the throne said, ""Behold, I am making all things new."" He said, ""Write, for these words of God are faithful and true."""
Ñwáè bbaèa ce e m byeè yi ba ñke' naè aè ba Sataèn. Nfeè' ntee msañ yu nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce mïì, ñgaâa rtee a ba bcïìndap Nyúè.	The enemy who sowed them is the devil. The harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are angels.
Máâ ke gheèter aè nfeè' wááwá aè rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ anaè aè bdïì' ce beèe a m be yu' rlii Kraâis ka'. Máâ ke geèe wa'a, faè dïì' m bo baè'ri mbenduè kuèundap ce ñwáè moè' aè boo ka'.	yes, making it my aim to preach the Good News, not where Christ was already named, that I might not build on another's foundation.
Seâe yoèñshi Nyúè aè ku' li rfa ce aède' seèe túr cuèu aè rsuñ ka' naè.	Now thanks be to God for his unspeakable gift!
E nyáá mbekïì a táá, a ká' a ce jáèr, a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a woweèe, a ka' baè' mbo e ce jáèr mbo, a ce nyáshi mbekïì, a ce kuè'si Nyúè.	Leaping up, he stood, and began to walk. He entered with them into the temple, walking, leaping, and praising God.
Msañ mi ka' kuè', buèr, ñke' caè yi yáátïì seè'ni aè ñke'.	But when the blade sprang up and brought forth fruit, then the darnel weeds appeared also.
Yïì beèe a ka' yu' wa'a, a du aè rkoo ye njobeè' woweèe a m ce kwaè'shi ená tu yi ce kar ye.	"When his friends heard it, they went out to seize him: for they said, ""He is insane."""
Le ryoèñ yu Jisos Kraêis. Be keè ba aè nfeè' ce e nyáá, tá weèe woweèe ba aèbee, tá weèe túr ñgúè' moè' efa foèo ce Nyúè aè fa neè ye.	When Christ, our life, is revealed, then you will also be revealed with him in glory.
Seèe rïìñ ená Nyúè aè m loèr nfaèñ njeñwáè a boo mbañruèñwáè aègho ka'. E m loèr nfaèñ mbañruèñwáè a boo njeñwáè aègho.	For man is not from woman, but woman from man;
Ca yi geèe weèe aè ce lu'shi seê, ka' weèe be yu' ryañ seè'ni na njo' rmoèoshïì ce li be vúè neè weèe aè mú nfeè' moè', aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá wa'a.	Wherein you greatly rejoice, though now for a little while, if need be, you have been put to grief in various trials,
Weèr aè m ce kwaè'shi ená weèr aè kweñger wáá. Geewa'a, ñgá' ca aè m koni weèr tá weèr bo kuè láè buu wááwá mbe mmbo Nyúè ce e ke fúr beèe efa rkwe, ke' ba mbe weâr mmboè ka'.	Yes, we ourselves have had the sentence of death within ourselves, that we should not trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead,
Bfúr weêr, aè ka' ba aèmboè rvúè Tata Jisos Kraêis, ker ba nfeè' ce seèe Jisoès weèe be tarte, weèr ce laèa neè weèe ená,	Now, brothers, concerning the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our gathering together to him, we ask you
Buu bbebep aè m ku ba njep ñgoèñ tá Nyúè ka' keè fa vi mncir. Mncir vi ka' tá ba aègho ka', aède' a be' buu bbebep ce ñwáè aè geèe ka'.	For until the law, sin was in the world; but sin is not charged when there is no law.
Ñwáè moè' aè vú a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yáê! Beèe ce weèe aè mú li' mbe shañ naè, a yu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ce yá'ni beèe mbo.”	"One came and told them, ""Behold, the men whom you put in prison are in the temple, standing and teaching the people."""
Bgúâú beèe anaè vi be noèñ aè nduunjïì aè múè rla' Nyúè anaè, aè ba rla' ce li yu rgoèr, aè ba rla' ce a m taa yaèp ñkúú aèfo mbe kïìntaa naè. A m fa mlii mo' neè rla' anaè aè rduèñshi njáèá njïì ce li m ba. Rmo' li m ba ená Sodoèm, rmo' li ba ená Ijïìp.	Their dead bodies will be in the street of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
Weèe aè ba ba beèe enjep ñgoèñ na, woweèe a ba koèñ weèe njobeè' weèe yu yaèp beèe. Geewa'a weèe yu ye beèe enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Máè ce weèe efa múè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na. A mbuèu ce woweèe a baèa weèe.	If you were of the world, the world would love its own. But because you are not of the world, since I chose you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
Àdeʼ seesèe foŋ ku gêe.	We too can do it.
E ta mbʉ nè ŋgar.	He shot the goat with a gun.
Nyúè aè m geèe buu bbáèá, a duñshi yi ñger aè mnduunjïì jáá jáèá jáá, a ker lor ñger ce yi ke vúè ese yi Yú' Rara, a gapshi neè beèe aèmboè e m koèñ, tá beèe a bo rïìñ foñ ená blaèa ca vi yu mini.	God also testifying with them, both by signs and wonders, by various works of power, and by gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to his own will?
Ŋgwe ce waa.	The dog is barking.
Geewa'a, mncir vi ce geèe yi, ntee yi ce bep Nyúè neè beèe bep. Mncir vi ka' tá ba ka', ñwáè bú' mncir ka'.	For the law works wrath, for where there is no law, neither is there disobedience.
Woweèe a ker túr rïìtu ka'. Woweèe a niñ njep múè bsaèrbuu, a koñ aè rgeèe vi aè nfeè' wááwá.	who having become callous gave themselves up to lust, to work all uncleanness with greediness.
Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès ce e m vúè a ba' aè ncuâu rsheè entombïì naè aè m niñ njo foñ a yá, a byemi.	So then the other disciple who came first to the tomb also entered in, and he saw and believed.
Nàʼ zhi ce zheŋger nje rtùu.	The cattle are grazing across the hill.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce beèe a m rïìñ yuu ce a m ce geèe ka' naè, Nyúè aè ce fuse. AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na, Nyúè aè ce laèa neè beâe aè bdïì' wááwá ená woweèe a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep,	The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all people everywhere should repent,
Ncïìndap Nyúè yïì embenjïì mo aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi njep rdip rgoèr. E ka' cuè', rdip rgoèr li ghuptïì a ba aèmboè bláá gúâú ñwáè wa'a. Buu bteèe ce vi m ba njo vi kweñgeèr wááwá.	The second angel poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood as of a dead man. Every living thing in the sea died.
E m fyeèni yïì ñkúè moè', a lor mbaèa efa gho a lá njeptii ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès.	having a field, sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles' feet.
Caè'ni neè ñwáè wááwá ce e yu aèbee a Jisos Kraêis. Bfúr ce a yu weèr woweèe aèfa a caè'ni weèe.	Greet every saint in Christ Jesus. The brothers who are with me greet you.
Kúr ñkuânyaèm mo' goèr seê, yi m ba aèfo a ce yeñger, a ba aè njïìsaèp ka'.	Now there was a herd of many pigs feeding far away from them.
Beèe magoèr a be kúti njïìnjïì, baèa wap btu, fyeèni wap btu,	Then many will stumble, and will deliver up one another, and will hate one another.
Ñgaâa fuèp a ku ba weèe woweèe aè nfeè' wááwá, aè ka' ba aèmboè máè yi, seèe be ba aè nfeè' wááwá ka'.”	"For you always have the poor with you, but you don't always have me."""
Ya njeèe yi ke yu' yaè njeèndoñ, rïîñ. Máè rïìñ yi foñ, yi ce vúè a máâ mbuèu.	My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
a yá ñgá' ce beèe a m ce fa neè máè, a yá mluè ce máè m ce yá. Wáè m yá yuu ce yi m koni máè aè rla' Antïìyoèk ba aè rla' IÌkonïìyoèm ker ba aè rla' Listraè. Beèe a m fa má ñgá' seê, máè ku táá tatap, Tata Jisos aè ja' má efa ñgá' anaè wááwá.	persecutions, and sufferings: those things that happened to me at Antioch, Iconium, and Lystra. I endured those persecutions. Out of them all the Lord delivered me.
Sataèn yu yeè taê. Weèe ce koèñ aè rgeèe ba buu ce e koèñ. E m ku ba ñwáè nyúshi beèe efa rkáè'. AÈde' e táá aè yuu mini ka', njobeè' e yu ñwáè mini ka'. E ke nya' mnde', ku nya' aèmboè yi ñgeèe yi yu naè njobeè' e yu ñwáè mnde', a ba taèr mnde'.	You are of your father, the devil, and you want to do the desires of your father. He was a murderer from the beginning, and doesn't stand in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks on his own; for he is a liar, and its father.
Wèr à tuŋ bbeʼ mbàŋ bvi tâ.	We have dug five game holes.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe yu ye beèe enjep nsheè na, máè lo ya e mbekïì. Weèe yu ye beèe enjep ñgoèñ na, máè ba ya ñwáè enjep ñgoèñ na ka'.	"He said to them, ""You are from beneath. I am from above. You are of this world. I am not of this world."
Múè' neè wee mntee neè weèr. Weèr aè geèe faèa neè ñwáè moè' ka', weèr aè daè'si ñwáè moè' ka', weèr aè ye sá' efa ñwáè moè' ka'.	Open your hearts to us. We wronged no one. We corrupted no one. We took advantage of no one.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yu', a wáp seê, a gweñger neè bsii njep nsheè.	When the disciples heard it, they fell on their faces, and were very afraid.
Dávïìd ce too ye ená Tataê, baná aède' e ker ba muu yïì aè njáâá ká?”	David therefore calls him Lord, so how is he his son?
Woweèe a ka' ce fyáèá muu jaèaki', ñgaâa jaèaki' a bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce fyáèá muu jaèaki' anaè njoká?”	"As they were untying the colt, its owners said to them, ""Why are you untying the colt?"""
Ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce yañ a? Ñgaèñ ká' btu embe coêr, tá a vú loo neè ye keèr yo' ye neè mgúr aè rlii Tata Jisos Kraêis.	Is any among you sick? Let him call for the elders of the assembly, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord,
weèe fa geèe tá m lo laèa neè njeèndoñ ntatap neè weèe aè nfeè' ce máè vúè ka'. AÈde' m laa tatap ba neè beèe ce a ce laèa ená weèr ce geèe rfaè' tá weèr bo ye sá' enjo, aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ a ke geèe naè.	Yes, I beg you that I may not, when present, show courage with the confidence with which I intend to be bold against some, who consider us to be walking according to the flesh.
A rlee.	We have constructed the water already.
Ñwáè aè ka' túr ntee rara, baná buu wááwá be ba brara a yeâ bsii. Ñwáè aè ka' túr ntee sii, ke' byemi ka' baná buu wááwá vi be ba brara neè ye ka' njobeè' mi mkwaè'shïì mi yu msii, e ke' ker rïìñ jáá jáá efa yuu boèñboñ ba yuu bebep ka'.	To the pure, all things are pure; but to those who are defiled and unbelieving, nothing is pure; but both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
Ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè a m sañ mlii beèe, a lá njep lá', a cu' aèmboè yaèp ndeèe aè m ba. A ka' cuè', rlii Saèkaèriyaè li fúú enjo ená e niñ mbe Ndaèp Tata Nyúè, too nráèá neè ye.	according to the custom of the priest's office, his lot was to enter into the temple of the Lord and burn incense.
E ka' ce duè, a yá Lávïì ce aè m ba muu Alfïìyoès aèmboè e cu mbe dïì' rfaè' ce e m ce koo mbaèa baèraè'. Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu.” E natïì a du a yeâ mbuèu.	"As he passed by, he saw Levi, the son of Alphaeus, sitting at the tax office, and he said to him, ""Follow me."" And he arose and followed him."
Kwâa ca à shaʼri njo mbèŋ ker ce gwè kaʼ.	This corn has withered because the rain has stopped falling.
Pitaè aè beesïì a laa enáê, “Yáê, weèr aè maè'shi yeèr buu wááwá a vú a wáâ mbuèu. Baná yuu ce weèr be koni yu ba ká?”	"Then Peter answered, ""Behold, we have left everything, and followed you. What then will we have?"""
Zhìi ta à m̀ fa btiʼ nè ye, a kwe.	His father gave the inheritance to him and died.
M ce cep byepkúú ce a yu bleebeèe ka' naè ená woweèe a du bguèu, bi boo, fyá' wap mndap boèñboñ faè dïì' ñwáè bbaèa koni fáñ aè rlaèa yuu bebep kuèu woweèe ka'.	I desire therefore that the younger widows marry, bear children, rule the household, and give no occasion to the adversary for insulting.
Kupse mɛ̀ ncʉ̀kì tâ.	Change five thousand francs for me.
Mee mgʉr mi yɛ̀ɛŋger e.	Your oil has melted.
Jisoès aè m duè a cu mbe ndaèp mbe Lávïì a ce yeñger. Ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a ce ye byee a ye ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu. Ku' njáèá beèe ca a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu.	It happened, that he was reclining at the table in his house, and many tax collectors and sinners sat down with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him.
Zhìsèe zhi yu mbe ndùŋ.	Donʼt take that one.
E laa neè beèe ená a cute aè mjáá, a lor bráâd ta ba nca baa caè, a ke' mbe buèu, a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a gapshïì neè beèe anaè.	He commanded the multitudes to sit down on the grass; and he took the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven, he blessed, broke and gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples gave to the multitudes.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce yu' blaâa Nyúè, ke' ce geèe buu ce vi laèa ka', baná ñgaèñ yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e fyá' yïì nyor nje cárlïîr.	For if anyone is a hearer of the word and not a doer, he is like a man looking at his natural face in a mirror;
Geewa'a beèe efa weâe mú a byemi ka'.” Jisoès aè m ku riñ beèe ce a be byemi ka' efa rkáè', a ker riñ foñ ñwáè ce e be fyeèni ye.	"But there are some of you who don't believe."" For Jesus knew from the beginning who they were who didn't believe, and who it was who would betray him."
E ka' baè' aètútú rla' Jáèrusaláèm faèdïì' ce nduunjïì yi suèu embe rtuèu Oleèf naè, ku' beèe ce a m ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ká' a ce yu' rboèñ, a ce yáá mbekïì seê, a ce náèsi Nyúè njobeè' ku' buu bghagha' ce woweèe a m yá.	As he was now getting near, at the descent of the Mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began to rejoice and praise God with a loud voice for all the mighty works which they had seen,
Ñwáè moè' efa woweèe ce Jisoès aè m koèñ se naè aè m cu a kár nyor a yeâ geñ.	One of his disciples, whom Jesus loved, was at the table, leaning against Jesus' breast.
Baná ñwáè wááwá be keè táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè, suñ yuu ce e m geèe.	So then each one of us will give account of himself to God.
Weèr rïìñ wa'a njobeè' weèr aè m ku fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca neè weèe ba neè cuèu caè' ka'. Weèr aè m feè'shi neè weèe neè ñger-ñwáè aè ñger Yú' Rara, a riñ ená yuu ce weèr ce laèa yi yu mini. Weèe rïìñ njáèá rcu ce weèr aè m ce cu a weâe mú. Weèr aè m ce cu wa'a njo' weèe.	and that our Good News came to you not in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and with much assurance. You know what kind of men we showed ourselves to be among you for your sake.
AÈmboè ñwáè ca aè m ku bii ghashi rkoo Pitaè ba Joân naè, beèe wááwá a bááñgeèr seê, a cañ a koni woweèe mbe njïì baaki ñkúú Solomúèn.	As the lame man who was healed held on to Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's, greatly wondering.
“Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ñkúú ce e m geèe ñkaâ' bguèu neè muu yïì.	"The Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who made a marriage feast for his son,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	3	E m tuu yi ñgaâa mfaè' ená a du laa neè beèe ce a m be aè ñkaè' anaè ená woweèe a vúê. A ka' duè laèa, woweèe a kanïì efa rvúè.	and sent out his servants to call those who were invited to the marriage feast, but they would not come.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	22	4	E ker tuu ñgaâa mfaè' moè', a laa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Duè neè suñ beèe ce máè be naè ená máè fáèr buu ñkaè' wáá. Máè sháshi ya naè', ba ya njeèe ce yi kuè'ñger a ce foo, a fár buu ñkaè' a misïî. Woweèe a vú lá ñkaâ' bguèu ca.’	Again he sent out other servants, saying, 'Tell those who are invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My cattle and my fatlings are killed, and all things are ready. Come to the marriage feast!""'"
Pailáèt aè ka' yu' blaèa ca, a wáp magoèr seê.	When therefore Pilate heard this saying, he was more afraid.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè ye enáê, “AÈde' weèr konïì bráâd ba efá ka' nyañ ku' beèe ca aègho, ce aèfa ku ba rïìñ na?”	"The disciples said to him, ""Where should we get so many loaves in a deserted place as to satisfy so great a multitude?"""
Fa kúsi neè yuu bebep neè yuu bebep ka. Faè kúsi mcáp neè mcáp ka'. Loo neè ba ená Nyúè ghoni beèe ce a geèe buu ca neè weèe, njobeè' Nyúè aè m ká' weèe ená weèe bo geèe wa'a, tá e bo ghoèni weèe.	not rendering evil for evil, or insult for insult; but instead blessing; knowing that to this were you called, that you may inherit a blessing.
Nfeè' yïì Muu Ñwáè be ba aèmboè nfeè' yïì Nowa aè m ba naè.	As it happened in the days of Noah, even so will it be also in the days of the Son of Man.
“Yáê, fa suñ ñwáè ka'. Duè duñshi yoè nyor neè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì embe Ndaèp Nyúè, gee tañshïì ce Musïìs aè m laèa ená ñwáè yañ msaèasïì gee tá beèe a bo rïìñ ená ñwáè anaè aè keè'se naè.”	"and said to him, ""See you say nothing to anybody, but go show yourself to the priest, and offer for your cleansing the things which Moses commanded, for a testimony to them."""
Yuʼshi mrùʼ anà enɛ mi bòŋ lɛ.	Taste that wine if it is good.
int.	come to a deadlock; come to a stalemate.
Yi ka' ba wa'a ñgaâa cor ce e m ba aè ñgoâñ Judaè wááwá, ker ba aè ñgoâñ Galeèle ba aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè a m cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè, a tap foñ. Woweèe a ka' ce wáp Tata Nyúè, Yú' Rara yi ce fa woweèe ñger foñ, cor aè ku' aè beèe.	So the assemblies throughout all Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, and were built up. They were multiplied, walking in the fear of the Lord and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit.
Ár aè ba muu Joshuèwaè, Joshuèwaè aè ba muu ÁÈlisaè, ÁÈlisaè aè ba muu Joraèm, Joraèm aè ba muu Mataèr, Mataèr aè ba muu Lávïì,	the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
AÈtaè e m ba gee mfaè' mghagha' fa yeâ laè' ka'. E m ku naa mi mmbo mbenduè ñgaâa byañ múcaèr, woweèe a ke'seè.	He could do no mighty work there, except that he laid his hands on a few sick people, and healed them.
Mɛ̀ ba suu mbàna à ryɛ yàa tâ.	I went down there to see my father.
Máè rïìñ máná vi blaèa vi yu ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Baná blaèa ce m ce laèa neè weèe yu ba blaèa ce máè yu' ese yaè Ta caè'caè'.”	"I know that his commandment is eternal life. The things therefore which I speak, even as the Father has said to me, so I speak."""
E nyòʼ muu.	She has got pregnant too soon.
M rïìñ boèñboñ máná Nyúè ce e m káè' a gee li rfaè' ce rboèñboñ ca njep weâe mntee be kuè duè kuèntombïì neè rfaè' anaè, caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce li be keè mïì aè noèñ ce Jisoès be vúè naè.	being confident of this very thing, that he who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Jesus Christ.
weèe fa teèe btu aèmboè weêe bta a m teèe neè Nyúè, a kani efa rgeèe yuu ce e m laèa naè ka'. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ce jáèr aè rïìñ naè, woweèe a m teèe btu neè máè. Woweèe a m teèe wa'a a mooshi máè.	don't harden your hearts, as in the rebellion, like as in the day of the trial in the wilderness,
E ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' efa rgani buu. Ryoèñ ñwáè li ke ba ku' buu ce ñwáè túr ka'.”	"He said to them, ""Beware! Keep yourselves from covetousness, for a man's life doesn't consist of the abundance of the things which he possesses."""
Máè m ce feè'shi blaèa ca neè weèe, a ke' ce feè'shi ba neè bfee enjep ñgoèñ na ka'. Máè m ce feè'shi ba neè ñger Yú' Nyúè ce yi m geèe weèe aè ka' riñ weená blaèa ca vi yu mini.	My speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
Ntee yi yañ nyaèa ca neè njeñwáè ca. E du a ma' bïìr a bár boo njeñwáè ca. Boo njeñwáè anaè yu beèe wááwá ce a ce láè mncir Nyúè, a ce suñ ená Jisoès yu yaèp Tataê.	The dragon grew angry with the woman, and went away to make war with the rest of her seed, who keep God's commandments and hold Jesus' testimony.
Moè' efa beèe ce a m bú' ncir a taa woweèe a Jisoès weèe naè, aè m suè' ye neè mcáp. E m laèa enáê, “Mboè a wáè Kraâis anaè a? Jaè' laè yo tu efa ñgá' tá aè bo jaè' weèr foñ.”	"One of the criminals who was hanged insulted him, saying, ""If you are the Christ, save yourself and us!"""
E byɛ̀ʼ ŋguu mbe tù.	He has carried wood on the head.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ce a m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mmbaa, a cute mbe bkaèbaèraè' kuèntombïì neè Nyúè naè, a gú'shïì neè Nyúè.	The twenty-four elders, who sit on their thrones before God's throne, fell on their faces and worshiped God,
Muu wèr à dù ŋwàʼ.	Our child has gone to school.
E m lò a du kù Gàrwà.	She left and went to Garoua.
OÈsayaè aè bi Jotaèm, Jotaèm aè bi Áhaèr, Áhaèr aè bi Háèsïìkayaè.	Uzziah became the father of Jotham. Jotham became the father of Ahaz. Ahaz became the father of Hezekiah.
AÈde' ñwáè no enjep ndoñ Tata Jisos Kraêis, ker no enjep ndoñ mnyúâmkaè' aè njáâá ká? AÈde' ñwáè ye byee ce yu ba byee Tata Jisos Kraêis, ker ye byee ce yu ba byee mnyúâmkaè' aè njáâá ká?	You can't both drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of demons. You can't both partake of the table of the Lord, and of the table of demons.
Seèe yoñshi Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis. E yu Taèr ce e ke koosimnse neè beèe, ker ce fa beèe ñger aè nfeè' wááwá.	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all comfort;
A mbuèu ce e túr ñger aè rgeèe tá beèe ce a vúè kuèntombïì neè Nyúè aè li rlii a luñ dúèdúè njobeè' e cu nteèe nfeseè a ce loo a seâe btuè.	Therefore he is also able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him, seeing that he lives forever to make intercession for them.
Njeèndoñ ca aè ker laa neè ye enáê, “Nyúè aè ka' gee yuu yi ba rara, aè fa loèr yuu anaè aèmboè yuu ce yi raa ka' ka'.”	"A voice came to him again the second time, ""What God has cleansed, you must not call unclean."""
Woweèe a duê, a fa ncoèo aè luèr embe nduè ncuâu rsheè, faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo joèo ka', a lá ñgaâa rkeè'nïì caè aèfo.	So they went with the guard and made the tomb secure, sealing the stone.
E m túr mkaèñsïì saèamba mbaè bo maè', saè' mbyáèráñ aè fúú eku yeâ cuèu. Vi bsii vi m ce raa aèmboè nyúè ce e ke sañ neèmootïì naè.	He had seven stars in his right hand. Out of his mouth proceeded a sharp two-edged sword. His face was like the sun shining at its brightest.
Beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka', a ba a weâe mú naè, a ce geèe njáèá bsaèrbuu ca foñ. Woweèe a ce yá mlo, mlo anaè mi ce geèe woweèe a ce bepsi wap mnyor, a kani efa ryu'nïì, a ce laèa bebep kuu byú' ce a ba ce yu'ni neè vi se naè.	Yet in the same way, these also in their dreaming defile the flesh, despise authority, and slander celestial beings.
Njàmnsù e ke bòŋ à mceŋ sê.	Vegetable usually does well on compose ridges.
AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, e ká' a ce yá'ni beèe mbe ndaèp rloo. Beèe ce a m yu', a m báèáñger, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè geèe njáèá ryá'nïì ca efá? A njáèá bfee ká ce a m fa neè ye wa'a? E geèe njáèá mfaè' mghagha' ca aè njáâá ká?	"When the Sabbath had come, he began to teach in the synagogue, and many hearing him were astonished, saying, ""Where did this man get these things?"" and, ""What is the wisdom that is given to this man, that such mighty works come about by his hands?"
Máè m báá weèe mbe nfeè' ce máè m ker vú a ca'ni weèe naè, a ker ce báá weèe seè'ni na tá nfeè' ce m be keèr vúè caè'ni weèe ka' gháá. M ce laèa neè beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep naè ker ba bár beèe ená m be vúè tá m koosimnse neè woweèe ka'.	I have said beforehand, and I do say beforehand, as when I was present the second time, so now, being absent, I write to those who have sinned before now, and to all the rest, that, if I come again, I will not spare;
E m loèr Pol ba Silaès a du aègho mbe yeâ ndaèp, a fa woweèe byee. A beèe embe yeâ ndaèp weèe a m lu'shi se njobeè' woweèe a m byemi neè Nyúè.	He brought them up into his house, and set food before them, and rejoiced greatly, with all his household, having believed in God.
Jáms ba Joân ce a m ba boo Sábáèdïî, ce a Saimúèn weèe a m ce koo nca, a m báèáñger foñ seê. Jisoès aè laa neè Saimúèn enáê, “Fa wáp ka', káâ' seè'ni na, aè be ce koo ba beèe.”	"and so also were James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. Jesus said to Simon, ""Don't be afraid. From now on you will be catching people alive."""
Máè m yá'ni weèe buu ce Tata aè m geèe máè rïîñ. Buu anaè yu ená, aè m ba neètú' ce a be fyeèni Tata Jisoès naè, e lor bráêd,	For I received from the Lord that which also I delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus on the night in which he was betrayed took bread.
Yú' Nyúè yi ke fa beèe bfee jáá jáèá jáá aè rgeèe buu. Ka' yi yu wa'a, Yú' anaè yi ku ba yi mo'sir.	Now there are various kinds of gifts, but the same Spirit.
À kaʼ yɛ nyo, à fa dù àtʉtʉ kaʼ.	If you see a snake, donʼt go near it.
Ñwáè aè ka' tá rïìñ aè rkeè'ni aè yïì ndap boèñboñ ka', aède' e gee eká ka' ke'ni aè cor Nyúè?	(but if a man doesn't know how to rule his own house, how will he take care of the assembly of God?)
Yi m ba foñ ená aè m ba aè nfeè' Pailáèt aè m ce sa' mnsa' ca, ñgwa yïì aè cep ntuu neè ye, a laa enáê, “Fa geèe yuu mo' neè ñwáè ce e geèe yuu bebep ka' naè ka', njobeè' máè yá rlo ntïìni aèmboè ye, li fa máè ñgá' seê.”	"While he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, ""Have nothing to do with that righteous man, for I have suffered many things this day in a dream because of him."""
Kuushi beèe buu ca, ker cep woweèe aè rlii Tata Nyúè ená a fa ce sár mnsár aè mú blaèa jáá jáèá jáá ka'. Njáèá mnsár anaè vi túr sá' ka', vi ke bepsi beèe ce a ce yu'.	Remind them of these things, charging them in the sight of the Lord, that they don't argue about words, to no profit, to the subverting of those who hear.
Ca yi ka' koni wa'a, bár ñgaâa byañ ce a m ba aè rla' anaè a vúseè, Pol aè gee woweèe a ke'seè.	Then when this was done, the rest also who had diseases in the island came, and were cured.
tá ñwáè bsaèrbuu ca yááti aèwañ. E yááti aèwañ tá Tata Jisos Kraâis lo vúè neè ñger-ñwáè, fyáp ye neè mbáp, tá e kwe, mïìsi bú aè noèñ anaè.	Then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will kill with the breath of his mouth, and destroy by the manifestation of his coming;
Ñgaâa maè' bïìr embe buèu wááwá a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu. Woweèe a m yar bcáâ' bbúú ce mú ncoèo moè' aè m ba aègho ka', a cute mbe mnyaèabaèraâ' bbúú.	The armies which are in heaven followed him on white horses, clothed in white, pure, fine linen.
A m tuu woweèe neè ñwaè' ce a m sañ enáê, “Ñgaâa ntuu Jisos ba btu embe cor ce a yu bfúr wee a sañ ñwaè' ca, a ca'ni bfúr enje jáá ce a ce cu aè rla' Antïìyoèk, ba Sirïìyaè, ker ba Sïìlesïìyaè.	"They wrote these things by their hand: ""The apostles, the elders, and the brothers, to the brothers who are of the Gentiles in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia: greetings."
Ñwáè anaè a m ce koèñ ená tá beèe a riñ ená yuu ce e bipshi anaè yi yu yáánïì, a bipshi neè Jisoès enáê, “Nfúraè yu ba nda seê?”	"But he, desiring to justify himself, asked Jesus, ""Who is my neighbor?"""
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr anaè, beèe mo' a vú neè ñgaèa byañ ba beèe ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m niñ njep woweèe, a vú aègho aè ryá Jisoès.	At evening, when the sun had set, they brought to him all who were sick, and those who were possessed by demons.
Agripaè aè laa neè Fástoès enáê, “M be koèñ foñ aè ryu' yuu ce ñwáè anaè be laèa.” Fástoès aè beesïì enáê, “AÈ be yu' yuu ce e be laèa ba aèyaèñseè.”	"Agrippa said to Festus, ""I also would like to hear the man myself."" ""Tomorrow,"" he said, ""you shall hear him."""
M ka' yá máná m be ye njáèá byee anaè tá nfúraè gee yuu bebep, gweè, baná m be keèr ye vi ka'.	Therefore, if food causes my brother to stumble, I will eat no meat forevermore, that I don't cause my brother to stumble.
Njeñwáè anaè aè m rïìñ yuu ce yi m koni ye, a ká' a wáp, a ce kaèñ, a vú a gwe njeptii Jisoès, a suñ yïì mini.	But the woman, fearing and trembling, knowing what had been done to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
Ñwáè ca aè ka' yu' yuu ce Jisoès aè laèa, a sá seê, a kar bsii a duê, njobeè' e m túr ku' buu seê.	But his face fell at that saying, and he went away sorrowful, for he was one who had great possessions.
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Jáêms, ce m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Nyúè ker ba neè Tata Jisos Kraêis. M ce sañ neè weèe ce beèe Isráèl ce aè mntáè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ce a da'se mbe tunshe sïìp. M ce ca'ni weèe.	James, a servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes which are in the Dispersion: Greetings.
M ce yoèñshi Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá njo' weèe, a ker ce loo neè weèe aè nfeè' ce m ka' ce loo.	don't cease to give thanks for you, making mention of you in my prayers,
Njàp ca à rʉ̀ʼte bòŋboŋ sê.	This soup is very delicious.
Woweèe a m kani efa kupse yap ntee, borni yaèp buu bbebep. Woweèe a m ku ce yúshi beèe, a ce geèe tú', a ce saèki, a ce yáèá.	They didn't repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their sexual immorality, nor of their thefts.
Máè ka' duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba bleebeèe efa múè Jus a suñ buu ce e geèe, a laa ená m laa máná e gweè mnsa'.	about whom, when I was at Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews informed me, asking for a sentence against him.
E m kwe, a tuñ ye, mnoèñ vi ka' baâ' btaar, e fúú efa rkwe aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè.	that he was buried, that he was raised on the third day according to the Scriptures,
Beèe a yá'ni mnyaèa ce aè rïìñ ba vïì enjep roè, ba bsiñ, vi ce geèe aèmboè beèe a koèñ;	For every kind of animal, bird, creeping thing, and thing in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed by mankind.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa wa'a, ñwáè rkeè'ni Ndap Nyúè moè' ce e m táá a yeâ geñ aè lip ye neè bo a laa neè ye enáê, “Haba! Waè' a njáèá njïì ce aède' aè beesïì yuu neè ñwáè ce e yu tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a?”	"When he had said this, one of the officers standing by slapped Jesus with his hand, saying, ""Do you answer the high priest like that?"""
E ka' geèe wa'a, a kúti mbe dïì' ce e ba ba, a bá' bráâd a ye, a de' a woweèe, caar túè' aè raêa. Túè' aè ka' raa, e ma'shïì woweèe a duê.	When he had gone up, and had broken bread, and eaten, and had talked with them a long while, even until break of day, he departed.
Baná weèe fa maè'shi tá yuu bebep yi túr ñger mbenduè wee mnyor ce vi be kweñger, tá weèe ce geèe buu bbebep ce weèe ce koèñ na ka'.	Therefore don't let sin reign in your mortal body, that you should obey it in its lusts.
Woweèe a m ker túr cuèu aè rbipshi yuu mo' neè ye ka'.	They didn't dare to ask him any more questions.
E ka' mïìsi, a kúti a yá ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ku bii ce buumi, a ce lúèshi a? Yáê, nfeè' aè gháá. A be fa Muu Ñwáè mbe mmbo ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.	"Then he came to his disciples, and said to them, ""Sleep on now, and take your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of Man is betrayed into the hands of sinners."
a laa enáê, “Fa neè máè njáèá ñger ca foñ, má máâ láè mmbo mbenduè ñwáè, ñgaèñ bo koni Yú' Rara.”	"saying, ""Give me also this power, that whoever I lay my hands on may receive the Holy Spirit."""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce ncoèp-moè'sir-aè-rrúèú, a du aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du a ko' mbe rtuèu ce Jisoès aè m laèa ená woweèe a ko' mbo naè.	But the eleven disciples went into Galilee, to the mountain where Jesus had sent them.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, bfúr a lor Pol njaè' moè'sir a du aègho aèwaâa rdip rgoèr, Silaès ba Timotïì a cu yap aè rla' Báèriyaè.	Then the brothers immediately sent out Paul to go as far as to the sea, and Silas and Timothy still stayed there.
Beèe ce a yu Jus ka', a riñ mncir ka', a ka' ce geèe buu mo' ce mncir vi ce laèa aè mkwaè'shïì map, ka' woweèe a rïìñ mncir ka' wa'a, woweèe a ku riñ yuu ce yi yu yáánïì.	(for when Gentiles who don't have the law do by nature the things of the law, these, not having the law, are a law to themselves,
Ñwáè wááwá gee yuu ce aède' yi ja' ñwáè moè'. Ñwáè fa geèe ba yuu ce yi ku boèñ ba ye caè'caè' ka'.	Let no one seek his own, but each one his neighbor's good.
Baná beèe ce a ce yá ñgá' aèmboè Nyúè aè koèñ, a ba fa waêp mnyor neè ñwáè ce e m boo woweèe, ce e yu ñwáè mini, kuè ce geèe buu bboèñboñ.	Therefore let them also who suffer according to the will of God in doing good entrust their souls to him, as to a faithful Creator.
AÈ ka' ba neètú' moè', e du a yá Jisoès, a laa neè ye enáê, “Rabaèi, weèr rïìñ werná a wáè ñwáè ryá'nïì ce Nyúè aè tuu, njobeè' Nyúè aè ka' tá fa ñwáè ñger ka', aède' ñgaèñ duñshïì mncoèo ce aè ce duèñshi na ka'.”	"The same came to him by night, and said to him, ""Rabbi, we know that you are a teacher come from God, for no one can do these signs that you do, unless God is with him."""
E ka' laèa wa'a, Pitaè aè bipshi neè ye enáê, “Tataê, nfúraè aè ka' ce geèe buu bbebep neè máè, m foosïì bkaâñ sá'? AÈde' m foosïì ye caar ba' ñkaèraè' saèamba a?”	"Then Peter came and said to him, ""Lord, how often shall my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?"""
AÈ m ba entombïì wer weèr foñ aè ba blúr, a tee btu. Weèr aè m daè' nduunjïì. Weèr aè m ba bkwaèa neè buu wááwá ce yeèr nyor aè m koèñ. Mer mkwaè'shïì mi m ba mmbembep, weèr aè ce ko'ndoñ neè beèe, beèe a mmbaa weèr, weèr aè baa woweèe foñ.	For we were also once foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, and hating one another.
AÈmboè seèe aè byemi ená Jisoès aè m kwe a fúú efa rkwe, seèe aè byemi foñ ená e ba aè nfeè' ce e vúè, tá Nyúè fúr beèe wááwá ce a m byemi neè Jisoès naè efa rkwe, aèmboè e fúr Jisoès efa rkwe naè.	For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so God will bring with him those who have fallen asleep in Jesus.
Beèe ca a ce rúè'ñger aè nfeè' wááwá. Yuu mo' yi ghááte woweèe ka'. Woweèe a geèe yuu ce yaèp nyor koèñ. Woweèe a ce laèa nlaèa naèa-nyor, a ce bu' cuèu tá a bo bo' beèe, koni yuu mo' enjo.	These are murmurers and complainers, walking after their lusts (and their mouth speaks proud things), showing respect of persons to gain advantage.
Jisoès aè laa neè Jus ce a m byemi neè ye naè enáê, “Weèe ka' ku ce geèe buu ce máè yá'ni weèe, baná weèe yu ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu ghup.	"Jesus therefore said to those Jews who had believed him, ""If you remain in my word, then you are truly my disciples."
Ŋkar yàa à gòo nè yaŋ bfěʼ bbaa.	My friend has suffered with a sickness for two years.
Coni mgʉr enjep botòr tɛ m̀ du yuu mmoʼ njo.	Drain oil from the bottle so that I should go and buy more in it.
E beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Wee ke yá aèmboè rbuu li baèñ aè mbuèuñkuèr, weèe laa weená ñgoèñ yi be fúú boèñ,	"But he answered them, ""When it is evening, you say, 'It will be fair weather, for the sky is red.'"
Wɛ̀ làa enɛ rjɛ̀r rli kʉ̀ni lɛ?	Did you say that the journey has failed to take place?
Baná a be lip ye, tá m ma'shi tá e duê.”	"I will therefore chastise him and release him."""
E ká' ye a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Yuu ce máè yu' a kuu wáè naè yu ba ká? Beè' yaè buu wááwá, sañ tá m bo rïìñ aèmboè vi yu, njobeè' aè be keèr ba yaè ñwáè rfaè' ka'.’	He called him, and said to him, 'What is this that I hear about you? Give an accounting of your management, for you can no longer be manager.'
E yu mʉnyaŋ sê.	He is very slow.
Máè suñ weèe buu ca seè'ni tá vi ka' koni, vi ka' lo koni tá weèe bo byemi ená m yu njáèá ñwáè ce m yu.	From now on, I tell you before it happens, that when it happens, you may believe that I am he.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, aè m ba aè nfeè' ce boo anaè a m ku bii njep rbúè, a ke' be geèe yuu bbebep káè yuu boèñboñ ka', Nyúè aè laa neè Ráèbákaè enáê, “Nlee be faè' neè Ñká'.” Nyúè aè m geèe wa' tá yi bo ba ená aè ce ba ye a ce moè' efa boo ca aèmboè e m kwaè'shi, aè ke' ba ba njobeè' yuu mo' ce ñwáè anaè aè m geèe ka', aè m ba njobeè' aè m káè' ba Nyúè.	"For being not yet born, neither having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God according to election might stand, not of works, but of him who calls, it was said to her, ""The elder will serve the younger."""
Rkwe muu anà rli bepsi cùu sê.	That childʼs death is very tragic.
Yuu mo' yi yu efa buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe ce aède' Nyúè buu efa ryá ka'. Buu wááwá vi yu aèwañ aè bsii Nyúè ce e yu ñwáè ce seèe be keè táá kuèntombïì neè ye aè noèñ mo', suñ buu wááwá ce seèe aè m geèe.	There is no creature that is hidden from his sight, but all things are naked and laid open before the eyes of him with whom we have to do.
Zhii nfee zhi ce yaŋ ye.	His leg is paining.
Ñwáè nsa' mnsa' ca aè ku ce kani. A ka' loè a laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘Ka' m ce wáp Nyúè ka', a ce loèr beèe aè yuu ka' wa'a,	He wouldn't for a while, but afterward he said to himself, 'Though I neither fear God, nor respect man,
Weèr aè ka' vúè yá weèe, a ce feè'shi aènji káè neè ntee sii ka', a ce bo' ñwáè moè' ka'.	For our exhortation is not of error, nor of uncleanness, nor in deception.
Bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na ce a m ce ká' rla' ca ená a woweèe a sakïî, ce ye ñgoèñ naè, a be yá nje efa mor ce yi be toèo rla' ca, taa mmbo mbe tuè, war.	The kings of the earth, who committed sexual immorality and lived wantonly with her, will weep and wail over her, when they look at the smoke of her burning,
Pailáèt aè beesïì enáê, “M yu ñwáè Jus ka'. Beèe ce a vúè neè wáè a fa neè máè yu yoè beèe ker ba beèe efa waâp mú ce a ke tañshi tañshïì naè. Wáè geèe ba ká a ka' koo wáè a vú aègho?”	"Pilate answered, ""I'm not a Jew, am I? Your own nation and the chief priests delivered you to me. What have you done?"""
Ca yi be geèe tá weèe koni fáñ aè rsuñ woweèe buu kuu máè.	It will turn out as a testimony for you.
Yàa tâa à byè mtɛɛ.	My father has planted palm trees.
Woweèe a seesïì, a lor mbaèa anaè, a du a yuu ñkúè ñwáè mboo mkïìñ aègho tá a bo ce tuñ bkïìloè aèfo.	They took counsel, and bought the potter's field with them, to bury strangers in.
ená m ba ñwáè rfaè' Jisos Kraâis neè beèe enje jáá. M ce geèe rfaè' ca wa'a, a ba aèmboè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì wa'a. M ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce e loè ese Nyúè tá beèe enje jáá a bo ba aèmboè yuu m ce tañshi tañshïì aègho ce yi yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njobeè' Yú' Rara yi geèe yi ba rara.	that I should be a servant of Christ Jesus to the Gentiles, serving as a priest the Good News of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be made acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit.
E beesïì enáê, “Buu ce aède' beèe a riñ kuu kúú Nyúè ka' na, Nyúè aè geèe weèe aè rïîñ. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè woweèe, Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a riñ ka'.	"He answered them, ""To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but it is not given to them."
a laa enáê, “Wáè ka' ba ñkúú Juês, aè ja' ka yo tu efa ñgá'.”	"and saying, ""If you are the King of the Jews, save yourself!"""
Caè'ni neè ñgaâa rbyemïì ce a ke niñ cor mbe waâp ndaèp. Caè'ni neè ÁÈpáènitoès ce e yu ñkaraè ce wa mntee naè. E m ba ñwáè entombïì aè rbyemi neè Kraâis aè ñgoâñ Áshaè.	Greet the assembly that is in their house. Greet Epaenetus, my beloved, who is the first fruits of Achaia to Christ.
Weèe aè ka' gee buu ce máè laèa neè weèe, weèe be cu njep la rkoèñnïì aèmboè má máè foñ aè geèe buu ce yaè Ta aè laèa ená m geêe, a cu njep li rkoèñnïì naè.	If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love; even as I have kept my Father's commandments, and remain in his love.
Sò à ba dû àbee, wɛ̀ du a jeʼsi mɛ̀ njokɛ?	We went together, and why did you confuse me?
Maamaê, m ce loo weèe seè'ni ená seèe koñni. M ce sañ wa'a a ce laèa ba yuu fi neè wáè ka', yu ba yi ce seèe a m yu' efa rkáè'.	Now I beg you, dear lady, not as though I wrote to you a new commandment, but that which we had from the beginning, that we love one another.
E tʉr ntàʼtè.	He has a job.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m rïìñ yuu mo' efa buu ce e m laèa anaè ka'. A m súèti mbuèu efa yuu ce e m laèa anaè ese woweèe, woweèe a ke' riñ yuu ce e m ce laèa anaè ka'.	They understood none of these things. This saying was hidden from them, and they didn't understand the things that were said.
Ntaaŋguu ca à waŋger.	This stick has cracked.
M be loo neè Taèr tá e tuusi weèe Ñwáè Rjaè' moè' tá e bo cu weèe woweèe nfeseè.	I will pray to the Father, and he will give you another Counselor, that he may be with you forever,--
Yi be keè ba wa'a njobeè' ñgaâa nya' mnde' ce a yu ñgaâa mbo'ni a be keè yá'ni njáèá ryá'nïì ca. Woweèe a be keè rïìñ jáá jáèá jáá efa yuu boèñboñ ba yuu bebep ka' njobeè' wap mntee vi yini.	through the hypocrisy of men who speak lies, branded in their own conscience as with a hot iron;
Ñwáè efa weâe mú ce mluè mi ka' ce koo ye, e kyeseè noèñ mo' mbenduè vi mnoèñ enjep ñgoèñ na a nda?	"Which of you, by being anxious, can add one moment to his lifespan?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	28	Mluè mi ce koo weèe aèmboè bcáâ' byar njoká? Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè bfúèlawaâ aè rïìñ vi ke kuè'. Vi ke faè' ka', ce ba' bcáè' ka'.	Why are you anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They don't toil, neither do they spin,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	29	Ka' yi yu wa'a, m ce suñ weèe máná ka' bcáè' kúú ce Solomúèn aè m ce yar ce vi m boèñ se naè, mo' yi m boèñ aèmboè fúèlawaè ka'.	yet I tell you that even Solomon in all his glory was not dressed like one of these.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	30	Nyúè ka' ce suèsi mjáá efa rïìñ ce mi ke yááti ntïìni, e fúú aèyaèñseè, a too njep mor, baná e be suèsi yi weèe goèr aèmboè ká? Le rbyemïì li yu múcaèr.	But if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today exists, and tomorrow is thrown into the oven, won't he much more clothe you, you of little faith?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	31	Baná mluè mi fa ce koo weèe tá weèe ce laèa weenáê, ‘Weèr be ye ba ká?’ káè enáê, ‘Weèr be no ba ká?’, káè ená ‘Weèr be yar ba ká?’ ka'.	Therefore don't be anxious, saying, 'What will we eat?', 'What will we drink?' or, 'With what will we be clothed?'"
Jisoès aè laa yuu ka'. Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì aè laa neè ye enáê, “M ce laèa neè wáè ená aè kaa aè rlii Nyúè ce e yu nteèe, suñ ka weèr ená aè yu Kraâis anaè, ce e yu Muu Nyúè naè láê.”	"But Jesus held his peace. The high priest answered him, ""I adjure you by the living God, that you tell us whether you are the Christ, the Son of God."""
E làa enɛ e be lɛ dù.	He said that he would go.
baná rshentee Nyúè li be gweè mbe tu ñwáè anaè. Rshentee Nyúè anaè li be ba aèmboè mruâ' mtatap ce a fiñshi ka'. E be no mi wááwá. E be yá mluè njep mor ce yi ce she aèmboè a láè lá mkaèñ njo wa'a. E be yá ñgá' ca aè bsii bcïìndap Nyúè ba Muu Njeèe.	he also will drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is prepared unmixed in the cup of his anger. He will be tormented with fire and sulfur in the presence of the holy angels, and in the presence of the Lamb.
Túè' e raa, beèe wááwá a du mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mú ñgaèptú' tá a bo yu' buu ce e ce yá'ni.	All the people came early in the morning to him in the temple to hear him.
Woweèe a ce suñ beèe ená yuu mo' yi be ker kur woweèe ka'. Ka' woweèe a ce suñ beèe wa'a, woweèe a ku bii faè' bkwaèa neè buu bbebep, njobeè' yuu ce yi ka' túr ñger mbenduè ñwáè, baná ñgaèñ yu ñkwaèa neè yuu anaè.	promising them liberty, while they themselves are bondservants of corruption; for a man is brought into bondage by whoever overcomes him.
Beèe a be loè tee yaèp mbuèu tá woweèe a yááti aèwañ aèmboè Jánïìs ba Jámbráès a m yááti naè.	But they will proceed no further. For their folly will be evident to all men, as theirs also came to be.
Nyor buu embe buèu yu jáá efa nyor buu enjep ñgoèñ. Rboèñ buu embe buèu li yu jáá efa rboèñ buu enjep ñgoèñ.	There are also celestial bodies, and terrestrial bodies; but the glory of the celestial differs from that of the terrestrial.
E ká' mú ghaèrñwáè, a tár mbe waâp mú,	Jesus called a little child to himself, and set him in the midst of them,
Wɛ̀ làa, mɛ̀ yuʼ bòŋboŋ kaʼ, banɛ à raasi mɛ̀.	When you spoke I did not understand, so explain it to me.
Yàa tâ à bɛʼ nè mɛ̀ njoʼ mɛ̀ lèse ŋwàʼ.	My father scolded at me because I forget a book.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè aè nyúè taar wa'a, Jisoès aè waa, a laa enáê, “ÁÈloêi, ÁÈloêi, Lama Saèbaètanïì?” ce mbuèu efa gho yu enáê, “Yaè Nyúè, Yaè Nyúè, wáè leèse máè njoká?”	"About the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying, ""Eli, Eli, lima sabachthani?"" That is, ""My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"""
Seèe wááwá aè koni bfee jáá jáèá jáá ese Nyúè njo' yi ntee boèñboñ ce e túr neè seèe, a ce geèe mfaè' aègho. Baná ñwáè wááwá geèe rfaè' neè bfee anaè. Nyúè aè ka' fa ñwáè bfee ce aède' e cep ntuu Nyúè, baná ñwáè anaè cep aèmboè li rbyemïì li yu.	Having gifts differing according to the grace that was given to us, if prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of our faith;
Tá a ka' ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap, Jisoès aè m rïìñ ená nfeè' aè gháá ce e be maè'shi ñgoèñ ca duè yá yïì Taê. E m koèñ yïì beèe ce a yu njep ñgoèñ na, a koñ woweèe a du a misïî.	Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, knowing that his time had come that he would depart from this world to the Father, having loved his own who were in the world, he loved them to the end.
Nfò à rɛɛ muu nè ngor mbe tu.	Nfor has hit the child with a tightened fist on the head.
Beèe a ka' vúè, a lor cáâ' beer a fa ye aè nyoèr, a gee rtaa kúú neè bsoèpsïì a sop ye mbe tuè,	They clothed him with purple, and weaving a crown of thorns, they put it on him.
Beèe ca a m kweñger a lá rlii mbenjïì njobeè' woweèe a m byemi neè Nyúè. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, woweèe a m koni yuu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be loè fa neè beèe ka'.	These all, having had testimony given to them through their faith, didn't receive the promise,
M ce roèo ba ená beèe a ku'si máè ka'. Ñwáè moè' yu ce e ce roèo ená beèe a ku'si ye, a ba ñwáè sa' mnsa'.	But I don't seek my own glory. There is one who seeks and judges.
Nleeŋwɛ̀ e ke buu à laʼ bghàrbèe âfo a ku mɛŋni ndèetoʼ.	When there is no elder in a compound, the children of that compound lack cultural knowledge.
“Weèr aè m yu' aèmboè e ce laèa enáê, ‘M be saè'si Ndap Nyúè ce beèe a baè'ri neè mmbo na, loèr mnoâñ btaar baè'ri njáèá moè' ce aède' ñwáè ba'rïì ka'.” ’	We heard him say, 'I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and in three days I will build another made without hands.'
Seèe ce liseèe rbyemïì li tap, seèe aè ba kur ntee neè beèe ce lap rbyemïì li yu wáèni. Seèe fa geèe ba buu ce nyor boñ ba seèe ka'.	Now we who are strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the weak, and not to please ourselves.
E gèe ŋgèe nfùŋrì sê.	He behaves very foolishly.
Jisoès aè ka' naèa mmir fyá' ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a laa enáê, “Mboâñtu mi yu neè weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa fuèp, njobeè' kúú Nyúè yu ye.	"He lifted up his eyes to his disciples, and said, ""Blessed are you who are poor, for yours is the Kingdom of God."
Woweèe a ka' ce duè, beèe mo' efa múè beèe ce a m ce keè'ni rsheè a du aè múè rla', a suñ beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì yuu ce yi koni.	Now while they were going, behold, some of the guards came into the city, and told the chief priests all the things that had happened.
Weèe yu ñgúè' moè' efa ndaèp Nyúè ce a boo. Beèe ce a m ba ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis, ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, a ba kuèundap anaè. Jisos Kraâis yu luèr rbuu ndap anaè,	being built on the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief cornerstone;
Tá ñwáè ka' ye bráâd ca, keèr no enjep ndoñ ca, ñgaèñ fyá' yïì nyor boèñboñ ka' gee wa'a.	But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of the bread, and drink of the cup.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe embe Jáèrusaláèm ce embe buèu, woweèe a yu bkwaèa ka'. Jáèrusaláèm ca yu yïìseèe maê.	But the Jerusalem that is above is free, which is the mother of us all.
E ka' yá, a bááñger seê. E ka' ce ko'shi aètútú aè rfyá', a yu' aèmboè Tata aè laèa enáê,	When Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. As he came close to see, a voice of the Lord came to him,
Ñwáè aè ka' no mdip ce aè fa máè a fa ye, aède' ntee mdip yi ker luu ye aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Mdip ce m be fa ñgaèñ mi be ba neè ye aèmboè rdip ce li be ce fúú aè nfeè' wááwá, geèe tá e koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè.”	"but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will never thirst again; but the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life."""
Rmoèoshïì ca li be vúè neè weèe tá le rbyemïì li bo ba yáánïì. Ka' gul ce e ke cu nfeseè ka' naè, beèe a ke loèr too njep mor tá e bo ba yáánïì. A mboè le rbyemïì ce li luèu ntaa a caa gul naè li ku ba wa'a. A be moèoshi li tá li bo ba yáánïì, tá a bo yoèñshi weèe, kuè'si weèe, yu'ni neè weèe nyúè ce Jisos Kraâis be yááti aèwañ.	that the proof of your faith, which is more precious than gold that perishes even though it is tested by fire, may be found to result in praise, glory, and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ--
Beèe ce a feèp a ce yá buu, mntáèñ a ce jáèshi yáánïì, ñgaâa msaèasïì a ce keè'se, ce ba brara, mnfuñtuè' a ce yu' buu, beèe ce a kweñger a ce kúti bteèe, ñgaâa fuèp a ce suñ Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ.	the blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have good news preached to them.
Weèe aè ka' niñ mbe ndaèp, weèe ca'nïì beèe embo.	As you enter into the household, greet it.
Moè' efa beâe bgoèrgoèr ca aè bipshïì neè máè enáê, “Wáè rïìñ njáèá beèe ce a yar bcáâ' bbúú na a? Woweèe a vúè efá?”	"One of the elders answered, saying to me, ""These who are arrayed in white robes, who are they, and from where did they come?"""
M túr buu goèr ce m ba sañ neè weèe. M be keèr sañ sañ ka', m ce kwaè'shi máná m be vúè yá weèe, laèa neè ya cuèu tá seèe bo lu'shi duè mïìsi.	Having many things to write to you, I don't want to do so with paper and ink, but I hope to come to you, and to speak face to face, that our joy may be made full.
A m boo ñka' anaè neè bluèr ce vi m ce raañger aèmboè kwakwa', a boo rla' mbe múè mo neè gul ce e m ce raañger aèmboè glaês.	The construction of its wall was jasper. The city was pure gold, like pure glass.
Ñwáè moè' aè ka' ba ce e ce sár yi ená buu ca yu wa' ka', baná ñgaèñ aè ba rïìñ ená weèr ce geèe ba buu ca, bcor wááwá vi ce geèe wa' foñ.	But if any man seems to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither do God's assemblies.
Nfeè' aè káè' a ce gháá ce a be ye ñkaè' neè bráâd ce a láè yes njo ka', ce a m ce too ená Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap.	Now the feast of unleavened bread, which is called the Passover, drew near.
Jisoès aè bipshi enáê, “AÈ joèo nda máè?” Beèe wááwá a kanïì ená a joèo ye ka'. Pitaè aè laa enáê, “Masaè, yu ba beèe ce a yu goèr a ce nyoèrni a ka' ce cïìrshi wáè mbetar.”	"Jesus said, ""Who touched me?"" When all denied it, Peter and those with him said, ""Master, the multitudes press and jostle you, and you say, 'Who touched me?'"""
Jisos Kraâis aè m vúè njep ñgoèñ, a caa njep mdip ba bláá. E m caèa ba njep mdip caè'caè' ka', e m caèa ba njep mdip ba bláá. Yú' yi m suñ aèmboè ye foñ njobeè' Yú' yu mini.	This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ; not with the water only, but with the water and the blood. It is the Spirit who testifies, because the Spirit is the truth.
E ce nyʉ̀ʼsi muu ca nè rfàʼ.	He is overburdening this child with work.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir wááwá ce a yá'ni buu kúú Nyúè, a yu aèmboè ñwáè ndap ce e fúr buu bfi ba buu brúèú embe dïì' ce e ke láè yïì buu.”	"He said to them, ""Therefore, every scribe who has been made a disciple in the Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who is a householder, who brings out of his treasure new and old things."""
Jisoès aè m laèa neè ñger-ñwáè enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' byemi neè máè baná ñgaèñ aè ku byemi ba neè máè ka', e byemi foñ neè ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	"Jesus cried out and said, ""Whoever believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me."
Kǔundap zhi ka kɛ̀ɛti banɛ ndap be gwè.	If the foundation collapses then the house will fall.
Beèe a be vúèse aè mntáâ' aè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ. Be ba beèe ce wap bli vi yu jáá jáèá jáá. Woweèe a be vúè wa'a, fyá' bgúâú beèe anaè aè mnoâñ btaar ba bá', byemi ená ñwáè tuñ bgúâú beèe anaè ka'.	From among the peoples, tribes, languages, and nations people will look at their dead bodies for three and a half days, and will not allow their dead bodies to be laid in a tomb.
Rfaè' ca yu lo rfaè' ka'. AÈ túr bo njo ka' njobeè' yo ntee yi yu rara aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	You have neither part nor lot in this matter, for your heart isn't right before God.
Fa koosi neè bbor ka', faè' neè tatap. Faè' neè neè Tata Nyúè neè ye ntee-ñwáè.	not lagging in diligence; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord;
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè nfúr weâr AÈpoloès, máè loo ye se ená e vú a bfúr mo' weèe vú ca'ni weèe, e yá yi ená yi yu boèñboñ ená e vú seè'ni ka'. E ka' lo koni nfeè', e ka' vúê.	Now concerning Apollos, the brother, I strongly urged him to come to you with the brothers; and it was not at all his desire to come now; but he will come when he has an opportunity.
Ñwáè ce e byemi neè Muu Nyúè, ñgaèñ rïìñ wa'a njep yeâ ntee. Ñwáè ce e byemi ka' ce loèr Nyúè aè ñwáè mnde', njobeè' ce e byemi yuu ce Nyúè aè laèa kuu Muu yïì ka'.	He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. He who doesn't believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has given concerning his Son.
A m boo ñka' anaè mbenduè bluèr ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú. A m sañ mlii beèe ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ce a m ba ñgaâa ntuu neè Muu Njeeè mbe bluèr anaè.	The wall of the city had twelve foundations, and on them twelve names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.
E ka' mïìsi, a laa beèe aè da'seè a duse.	When he had thus spoken, he dismissed the assembly.
baná weèe fa naèa tu ená weèe aè caèa mmba' ce ce a m faèrshi efa Oleèf ce aè mñkúè naè ka'. Weèe aè ka' ce naèa nyor, weèe kuushi ená yu ba weèe ce weèe ce geèe mñgaâñ ce vi ce kuè' ka', yu ba mñgaâñ ce ce vi geèe weèe aè ka' ce kuè'.	don't boast over the branches. But if you boast, it is not you who support the root, but the root supports you.
Nyúè ce e ke sañ, túr rboèñ li, ñwáá yi túr rboèñ li, mkaèñsïì mi túr rboèñ lap, lap rboèñ anaè li ba jáá jáèá jáá.	There is one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars; for one star differs from another star in glory.
Weèr aè ka' baè' mbe dïì' mo' yá rla' Saiproès, a ma'shi li aè bo ñkoèp a caa a du a ba' aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè. Keñ aè du a táá aè rla' Tayaè tá a bo fúshi buu embo aèfo.	When we had come in sight of Cyprus, leaving it on the left hand, we sailed to Syria, and landed at Tyre, for there the ship was to unload her cargo.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè ce laèa neè weèe seè'ni ená weèe ma' ndeâe mbembep ba bsaèrbuu. Nyúè ce byeè vi blaèa njep weâe mntee, baná weèe mú' wee mntee, yu' vi neè rbonïì-ñwáè. AÈde' vi gee weèe luêñ.	Therefore, putting away all filthiness and overflowing of wickedness, receive with humility the implanted word, which is able to save your souls.
Woweèe a ka' yu' aèmboè e laèa neè woweèe ba aè li Hibruè, woweèe a misïì a cu nyoèñ. Pol aè laa enáê,	When they heard that he spoke to them in the Hebrew language, they were even more quiet. He said,
E laa neè ñwáè ce e m ce fyá' yi ñka' enáê, ‘Yáê, yu seè'ni bfeâ' btaar aèmboè máè vúè a fyá' mbe ce ca a yá yi yú ka'. Gwaèr yi, yi ce bepsi nshe ca aè cicïì njoká.’	He said to the vine dresser, 'Behold, these three years I have come looking for fruit on this fig tree, and found none. Cut it down. Why does it waste the soil?'
Yee ŋgwè zhi ghɛɛ ɛ.	Your carrots are ready for harvest.
E fa buu ntaa nè ye à cicì.	He has given the goods to him without pay.
Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni, weâe rïìñ aè rfyá' buu, riñ aèmboè ñgoèñ yi be ba, ker yá aèmboè rbuu li yu, weèe ku riñ yuu ce yi be ba. Weèe aè ka' ke' riñ aè rfyá' buu ce vi ce koni aè nfeè' yïû seè'ni, rïìñ yuu ce yi be ba ka' njoká?	You hypocrites! You know how to interpret the appearance of the earth and the sky, but how is it that you don't interpret this time?
Ndap moè' yu ce aè buu efa rbaè'ri ñwáè ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, ñwáè ce e m geèe buu wááwá yu Nyúè.	For every house is built by someone; but he who built all things is God.
A bi yeè ñwáè rjaè' aè rla' Dávïìd ntïìni na. A ye Kraâis anaè ce e yu Tataê.	For there is born to you, this day, in the city of David, a Savior, who is Christ the Lord.
Yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa neè ye yi m ba ená yïì ñgúè be loè bkïìloè, cu aè ñgoâñ beèe mo' tá beèe anaè a gee woweèe a kúti bkwaèa, jar neè woweèe aè bfeè' mjeèe kyeèe.	God spoke in this way: that his seed would live as aliens in a strange land, and that they would be enslaved and mistreated for four hundred years.
AÈ ka' ba koni ká koni weèr, weèr ce duèñshi ená weèr yu ñgaâa mfaè' neè Nyúè. Weèr ce duèñshi wa'a aè njáèá njïì ce weèr aè kur ntee seê, a táá tatap aè nfeè' ce weèr ce yá ñgá', ba aè nfeè' ce fuèp aè koo weèr, ker ba aè nfeè' ce buu aè ka' tap neè weèr.	but in everything commending ourselves, as servants of God, in great endurance, in afflictions, in hardships, in distresses,
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Pitaè, m ce suñ wáè máná tá nduñgúp ka' toñ neètú' e ntïìni na, aè be kani ñkaèraè' taar ená aè rïìñ máè ka'.”	"He said, ""I tell you, Peter, the rooster will by no means crow today until you deny that you know me three times."""
Ka' Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba raèraâ Lávïì ka' wa'a, e m koni buu ese Abraèham ce e yu ñwáè ce Nyúè aè m kaè' buu neè ye, a ghoni ye.	but he whose genealogy is not counted from them has accepted tithes from Abraham, and has blessed him who has the promises.
Geewa'a, nfeè' moè' be ba ce a be koo nduu-guèu tá woweèe a ji mdip aè nfeè' anaè.	But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then will they fast in that day.
M ce loo máná Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, tá Nyúè koñ weèe, tá Yú' Rara yi gee weèe ba aèbee.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, be with you all. Amen.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' anaè a ce too ená Saèkiyoès. E m ba tu neè ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', a túr mbaèa foñ seê.	There was a man named Zacchaeus. He was a chief tax collector, and he was rich.
Muu ca ce ceni nlàa sê.	This child is speak very quickly.
“Weèe aè ka' ce geèe rloo, weèe fa geèe aèmboè ñgaâa mbo'ni a ke geèe naè ka'. Woweèe a ke koèñ aè rtáá mbekïì aè mndap mloo ker ba aè btase, gee rloo tá beèe a bo yá woweèe. M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè, woweèe a koo wap blaè' wáá.	"When you pray, you shall not be as the hypocrites, for they love to stand and pray in the synagogues and in the corners of the streets, that they may be seen by men. Most certainly, I tell you, they have received their reward.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	6	Wáè ka' ce loo, aè du mbe wáâ rum ndap, cete keèñ, loo neè yoè Ta ce a ke yá ye ka', tá yoè Ta ca ce e ke yá buu ce beèe a geèe aè bsúèti bo laè' wáè.	But you, when you pray, enter into your inner room, and having shut your door, pray to your Father who is in secret, and your Father who sees in secret will reward you openly.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	7	Weèe ka' ce loo, weèe fa ce laèa blaâa bcicïì aèmboè beèe enje jáá a ke geèe naè ka'. Woweèe a ke geèe wa'a ce kwaè'shi ená Nyúè be yu' map mloo njobeè' woweèe a loo laa buu goèr.	In praying, don't use vain repetitions, as the Gentiles do; for they think that they will be heard for their much speaking.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	8	Weèe fa ba aèmboè woweèe ka', njobeè' yeè Ta rïìñ yuu ce weèe aè buu wáá, tá weèe ka' keèe bipshi ená e gee yi neè weèe.	Therefore don't be like them, for your Father knows what things you need, before you ask him.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	9	Baná weèe ce loo ba aè njáèá enáê, ‘Yeèr Ta ce e yu embe buèu, tá lo rlii li ba rrara,	Pray like this: 'Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	10	tá yo kúú yi ká', tá beèe a gee yuu ce aè ce koèñ njep ñgoèñ na aèmboè a ce geèe mbe buèu.	Let your Kingdom come. Let your will be done, as in heaven, so on earth.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	11	Fa weèr byee ce vi ghááte neè weèr ntïìni.	Give us today our daily bread.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	12	Foèosi weèr efa yeèr buu bbebep aèmboè wee weèr aè foèosi beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep neè weèr.	Forgive us our debts, as we also forgive our debtors.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	13	Fa maè'shi tá rmoèoshïì li vú neè weèr ka', fúr weèr embaè mmbo Sataèn ce e yu ñwáâ mbembep. [Geèe buu ca neè weèr njobeè' kúú yu yo, ñger aè ba yo, bkuè' aè ba wo nfeseè. Yi yu wa'a.]’	Bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil one. For yours is the Kingdom, the power, and the glory forever. Amen.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	14	Weèe aè ka' foosi beèe ce a geèe buu bbebep neè weèe, baná yeè Ta embe buèu be foèosi weèe foñ.	For if you forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you."
E natïì a lor muu ba ma a du aègho aè ñgoâñ Isráèl.	He arose and took the young child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
Máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e táá aè nyúè. E m waa a ká'shi bsiñ ce vi ke ye bgúâú buu, a laa neè vi enáê, “Vúè neè aèbee ye ku' ñkaè' ce Nyúè aè ká'.	"I saw an angel standing in the sun. He cried with a loud voice, saying to all the birds that fly in the sky, ""Come! Be gathered together to the great supper of God,"
Taantoʼ tʉr njoʼ mbe tù.	Tanto has a patch of hair on his head.
Yá neè yuu ce njáèá ñkoosimnse ce Nyúè koèñ na aè geèe neè weèe. E geèe weèe aè lor buu tatap seê, a ka yeè njo. E geèe nyor aè bep weèe, weèe a ce báèáñger, a ce koèñ ená seèe ba cuâu mo'sir, ntee yi ce luèu weèe aè rgeèe buu bboèñboñ. E geèe weèe aè tamïì nyor aè rsa' ñwáè ce e geèe yuu bebep. Weèe aè duèñshi ená weèe túr bo njep yuu bebep anaè ka' koo múcaèr.	For behold, this same thing, that you were made sorry in a godly way, what earnest care it worked in you. Yes, what defense, indignation, fear, longing, zeal, and vengeance! In everything you demonstrated yourselves to be pure in the matter.
E ka' laèa buu ca wa'a, beèe magoèr a byemïì neè ye.	As he spoke these things, many believed in him.
Mkwe mi koo mbe loʼ ha sê.	Many people have died these days.
Ñwáâ ñká' aè laa neè yïì ta enáê, ‘Yaè taê, gaèp bti' fa wa.’ E ka' laèa wa'a, e lor yïì buu a gap neè woweèe.	The younger of them said to his father, 'Father, give me my share of your property.' He divided his livelihood between them.
E ce geèe rloo wa'a, Nyúè aè gee e yá ñwáè moè' ce li rlii li yu ená AÈnaèniyaès aèmboè e vúè a niñ mbe ndaèp a lá mmbo mbe yeâ nduè tá e bo yá buu.”	"and in a vision he has seen a man named Ananias coming in, and laying his hands on him, that he might receive his sight."""
Jisoès aè riñ yuu ce woweèe a ce laèa, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce le rbyemïì li yu múcaèr, weèe ce laèa fa weâe mú ená weèe túr bráâd ka' njoká?	"Jesus, perceiving it, said, ""Why do you reason among yourselves, you of little faith, 'because you have brought no bread?'"
Baná weèr aè byemi yer ba rkwe, tá weèe bo koni ryoèñ.	So then death works in us, but life in you.
a ku ba a woweèe aè rïìñ aè bfeè' mñkyeèe a ce kur ntee neè woweèe aèfo.	For a period of about forty years he put up with them in the wilderness.
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ entoèmbïì embe múè ñgaèa, aè mú ñgaèptú' seê, bbyeèñge anaè a lor mgúr ce a m kupshi, a du faèdïì' ce rsheè li m ba.	But on the first day of the week, at early dawn, they and some others came to the tomb, bringing the spices which they had prepared.
Ka' ba ená máè bú' ncir a gee yuu mo' ce a ba yú máè, m kanïì efa rkwe ka'. Ka' ba ená buu ce Jus a laèa aèmboè máè na vi yu mini ka', ñwáè moè' túr ñger aè rkoo máè fa neè woweèe ka'. M ce koèñ máná a sa' wa mnsa' ba njeptii ñkwe Ruêm.”	"For if I have done wrong, and have committed anything worthy of death, I don't refuse to die; but if none of those things is true that they accuse me of, no one can give me up to them. I appeal to Caesar!"""
Yo kuèu yi ka' gee wáè aè gee yuu bebep, aè tee yi ma'; yi yu aèndeèe ená aè niñ mbe dïû' rcu ce nfeseè, buu kuèu, neè ce ená aè túr mkuèu mmbaa, tá a ma' wáè njep mor.	where their worm doesn't die, and the fire is not quenched.' If your foot causes you to stumble, cut it off. It is better for you to enter into life lame, rather than having your two feet to be cast into Gehenna, into the fire that will never be quenched--
Weâe gee wa'a, baná weèe aè loèr yeè ndeèe a siñsi mncir Nyúè aègho. Ku' buu moè' yu foñ aèmboè bca, ce weâe ke geèe.”	"making void the word of God by your tradition, which you have handed down. You do many things like this."""
Ñgúè buu moè' aè gweñgeèr yi ba mbenduè nshe ce e m ba mbenduè ryáá. Ñgúè buu anaè aè yañseè a fúú njobeè' nshe e mbenduè ryáá anaè aè m ba goèr ka'.	Others fell on rocky ground, where they didn't have much soil, and immediately they sprang up, because they had no depth of earth.
Mnoèñ mo' vi ka' caèa, ÁÈlisabáèt aè koo rbúè, a cu mbe ndaèp mñwáá taê, a ker ce fúú aè múè beèe ka'.	After these days Elizabeth, his wife, conceived, and she hid herself five months, saying,
E m duè a yá Pailáèt, a laa neè ye ená e fa gúâú ñwáè neè ye tá e tuñ. Pailáèt aè byemïì.	This man went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given up.
Weèr aè ka' baè' aèfo, tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe yi yá keñ yïû aè rla' AÈláèksandaè ce e m ce duè aè to' Italeè, a fa weèr mbo.	There the centurion found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, and he put us on board.
Jisoès aè ka' yá wa'a, a laa enáê, “Yi yu tatap seê, neè ñgaâa mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.	"Jesus, seeing that he became very sad, said, ""How hard it is for those who have riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!"
Sèe luusi ŋgòŋ nè bii.	Let us stimulate the place with a dance.
Kyer wɛ̀, kù fa mɛ̀ wo labaʼ.	I beg you, just give me your shoes.
Beèe ce Nyúè aè m laèa ená woweèe a be feese muu yïì naè, e m ká' woweèe. Beèe ce Nyúè aè m ká' anaè, e m geèe woweèe a ba byáánïì. Beèe ce e m geèe woweèe a ba byáánïì naè, e m kuè'si woweèe foñ.	Whom he predestined, those he also called. Whom he called, those he also justified. Whom he justified, those he also glorified.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' Jisoès aè ba aè rla' mo', mbañruèñwáè moè' aè ba aèfo ce msaèasïì mi m koo ye aè nyor wááwá. E ka' yá Jisoès a gwe njep nsheè neè bsii, a bu' mmbo neè ye a laa enáê, “Tataê, wáè ka' koêñ, aè gee m ke'seè, ba nrara.”	"It happened, while he was in one of the cities, behold, there was a man full of leprosy. When he saw Jesus, he fell on his face, and begged him, saying, ""Lord, if you want to, you can make me clean."""
Beèe a ka' kaari aèbee, Pailáèt aè bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce weèe ce koèñ ená m fúr embe shañ fa neè weèe yu nda? M fúr ba Baèrabaès káè Jisoès ce a too ená Kraâis naè?”	"When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, ""Whom do you want me to release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus, who is called Christ?"""
Tá rlu'shïì li ba mbe buèu, ker ba neè beèe wááwá ce a ce cu mbo. Yi yu bebep neè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na ba mdip wááwá, njobeè' a maè' Sataèn embe buèu, e suu a ce cu a woweèe. Ntee yi ce yañ ye, njobeè' e rïìñ ená yïì nfeè' ku báti ba múcaèr seê.”	"Therefore rejoice, heavens, and you who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and to the sea, because the devil has gone down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he has but a short time."""
Beèe wááwá a ku ce kwaè'shi ba aèmboè wap btu, a ke' ce kwaè'shi aèmboè yuu ce Jisoès ce roèo ka'.	For they all seek their own, not the things of Jesus Christ.
E laa neè beèe caè ená woweèe a cute aè nsheè.	He commanded the multitude to sit down on the ground;
Nyúè aè m fa muu yïì nta' ce yi caèa mnta' bcïìndap Nyúè. Cena yi ku ba foñ aèmboè rlii ce Nyúè aè fa neè ye li caa mlii bcïìndap Nyúè naè.	having become so much better than the angels, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they have.
Làa ne Nfòmi enɛ e vʉ cɛr.	Tell Nformi that he should come quickly.
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba bleebeâe aè to', ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, ba bár ñgaâa kansuèr wááwá a seesïì aèmboè a be geèe neè Jisoès. A ka' seèesi wáá, a kur ye, a du aègho a fa neè Pailáèt.	Immediately in the morning the chief priests, with the elders and scribes, and the whole council, held a consultation, and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him up to Pilate.
A m laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a fúú embe kansuèr. Woweèe a ka' fúú, ñgaâa kansuèr a ká' a ce seèesi yuu ce a be geèe neè woweèe.	But when they had commanded them to go aside out of the council, they conferred among themselves,
Jisoès aè m cu aè mbeèp dïì' ce a m ce fa mbaèa mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ce fyá' aèmboè beèe a ce láè mbaèa njep ñkuèp rfa. Ñgaâa mbaèa a m fa mbaèa seê.	Jesus sat down opposite the treasury, and saw how the multitude cast money into the treasury. Many who were rich cast in much.
Beèe ce a m ba aèfo a yá yuu ce yi m koni, a suñ beèe ce a m vúè naè aèmboè a m geèe ñwáè anaè aè luêñ.	Those who saw it told them how he who had been possessed by demons was healed.
Ñwáè efa weâe mú ce mluè mi ka' ce koo ye, e kyeseè noâñ mo' mbenduè vi mnoèñ enjep ñgoèñ na a nda?	Which of you by being anxious can add a cubit to his height?
Byemi neè neè rraa ca aèmboè li ku bii fa weâe mú na, tá weèe bo ba boo ce aè rraa.” Jisoès aè ka' laèa blaèa ca mïìsi, a lá'si nyor efa múè beèe a du a cu mimñgi'.	"While you have the light, believe in the light, that you may become children of light."" Jesus said these things, and he departed and hid himself from them."
A m maè'shi woweèe, woweèe a natïì a du aè rla' Antïìyoèk, a ka' baè', a baashi ñgaâa rbyemïì wááwá mbe dïû' mo'sir, a fa ñwaè' anaè neè woweèe.	So, when they were sent off, they came to Antioch. Having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
Túè' aè ka' raa, bjep vi ba aè múè bsoogáè se njobeè' woweèe a m rïìñ yuu ce yi m koni Pitaè ka'.	Now as soon as it was day, there was no small stir among the soldiers about what had become of Peter.
Woweèe a ka' taa ye mbe kïìntaa, a lor vi bcáè' a ma' kaèñ aègho tá a bo yá aèmboè a be gaèp. A ka' gaèp wáá,	When they had crucified him, they divided his clothing among them, casting lots,
Beèe mo' efa woweèe a m táá mbe múè mcuèñ mor, mor yi too woweèe ka'. Weèe mo' a m luèñ efa bïìr. Ka' woweèe a m ba bgoè'sïì wa'a, a m ku lo a gee buu btatap. Beèe mo' a m túr ñger aè rmaè' bïìr. Beèe mo' a m juèu ñgaâa maè' bïûr aè bto' mo'.	quenched the power of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, from weakness were made strong, grew mighty in war, and caused foreign armies to flee.
M ce laèa cena neè wáè aè bsii Nyúè, ba aè bsii Jisos Kraêis, ker ba foñ aè bsii bcïìndap Nyúè ce Nyúè aè ce. M ce laèa tatap seê, ená aè gee buu ce m ce laèa neè wáè na, ke' ce so'niñgoèñ ka'. Gee neè beèe wááwá yáánïì.	I command you in the sight of God, and Christ Jesus, and the chosen angels, that you observe these things without prejudice, doing nothing by partiality.
M ̀ be tarshi kǎa bàa ha.	I will repair this torn bag.
Jisoès a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a du mbe dïì' mo' embe rtuèu anaè ce a m ce too ená Gáètsámanïì, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cu neè mbena tá m du nje na duè geèe rloo.”	"Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, and said to his disciples, ""Sit here, while I go there and pray."""
E ka' baè', a yá ñwáè moè' embe ndúè' Juês, ce a m ce too ená AÈkwilaè. A m bi ye aè rla' Pontuès. E m loâ aè rla' Italeè a ñgwa yïì ce a m ce too ená Preèsilaè njobeè' ñkúú Klaâdïìyoès aè m fa rsa' ená Jus a fúú aè rla' Rum duse. Pol aè m duè aè ryá woweèe,	He found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by race, who had recently come from Italy, with his wife Priscilla, because Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome. He came to them,
Weèe fa maè'shi tá ñgúè' moè' efa yeè nyor kúti ba yuu ce weèe be ce geèe buu bbebep aègho ka'. Fa neè yeè nyor ba neè Nyúè aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger, a kúti bteèe. Maè'shi neè tá yeè nyor wááwá ba ba yuu ce Nyúè be ce geèe mfaâ' myáánïì aègho.	Neither present your members to sin as instruments of unrighteousness, but present yourselves to God, as alive from the dead, and your members as instruments of righteousness to God.
Beèe a yá aèmboè woweèe a ce duè, a riñ woweèe, a fúúse efa mla' wááwá, a cañse a du a ba' aè dïì' anaè entombïì.	They saw them going, and many recognized him and ran there on foot from all the cities. They arrived before them and came together to him.
E koo ye à kùu.	He held him by the leg.
njobeè' noèñ yïû Muu Ñwáè yi be ba aèmboè mbeèñ ce e ke baèp rbuu li raa, káâ' a mbuèu rbuu mo' du ba' aè rmo' naè.	for as the lightning, when it flashes out of the one part under the sky, shines to the other part under the sky; so will the Son of Man be in his day.
Rïìñ neè mbe dïì' ce weèe táá. Weèe táá ba mbe dïì' ce beèe Isráèl a m be táá naè ka'. Woweèe a m táá aègee rtuèu ce a m ce too ená Sinaèi. AÈ m ba rtuèu ce aède' ñwáè aè m ba joêo. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè mcuèñ mor mi ko' mbekïì, túè' aè sii bïìp, fu' yi ce caèa tatap seê.	For you have not come to a mountain that might be touched, and that burned with fire, and to blackness, darkness, storm,
Beèe a vúâ aè ñgoâñ Frijïìyaè ba Paèmfilïìyaè ker ba aè ñgoâñ Ijïìp ba bdïì' moâ' aè to' Lebïìyaè ce vi yu aègee Saèireên. Beèe mo' efa weâr mú ce a vúâ aè ñgoâñ Ruêm, yu Juês, ba beèe mo' enje jáá ce a byemi neè Nyúè Juês.	Phrygia, Pamphylia, Egypt, the parts of Libya around Cyrene, visitors from Rome, both Jews and proselytes,
Beèe mo' a laa enáê, “ÁÈno, a ye.” Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “AÈi', e ku feese ye feese.” E laa yi ená “A máè ñwáè anaè.”	"Others were saying, ""It is he."" Still others were saying, ""He looks like him."" He said, ""I am he."""
Pol aè ka' baè' mbe dïì' ce a be loè embo ce ko' ko', beèe a gúmïì a yeâ nduè, bsoogáè a boñlaèr a byá' ye.	When he came to the stairs, it happened that he was carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd;
Woweèe a be keè rïìñ Nyúè ba aè mñguèpcuèu keè' rïìñ ye enjep ntee ka', Fa táá kuèu weèe njáèá beèe anaè ka'.	holding a form of godliness, but having denied its power. Turn away from these, also.
Andruè, Feleêp, Baètoèlomïì, Matïìyoè, Tomaês, Jáms ce e m ba muu Alfïìyoès, ba Taèdiyoès. Saimúèn ce e m ba moè' efa múè beèe Siloèt,	Andrew; Philip; Bartholomew; Matthew; Thomas; James, the son of Alphaeus; Thaddaeus; Simon the Zealot;
Muu Ñwáè be keèe tuu vi bcïìndap tá woweèe a baashi buu ce vi ke geèe beèe a ce geèe buu bbebep, ker ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep wááwá embe dïì' yi kúú,	The Son of Man will send out his angels, and they will gather out of his Kingdom all things that cause stumbling, and those who do iniquity,
Weèe fa buumi ka'. Lá' neè, tapsi ryoèñ cor ce li báti naè, faè dïì' li ba'si kwe ka'. Máè yá máná ye ñgeèe yi ghááte aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	Wake up, and keep the things that remain, which you were about to throw away, for I have found no works of yours perfected before my God.
Pailáèt aè ka' yá ená yuu geèe yi ker ba ka', bghaa vi ce roèo ko' aè múè beèe, e lor mdip a su'si mi mmbo aègho aè bsii beèe, a laa enáê, “Ya bo yi yu njep rkwe ñwáè ca ka', kwaè' weèe.”	"So when Pilate saw that nothing was being gained, but rather that a disturbance was starting, he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, ""I am innocent of the blood of this righteous person. You see to it."""
À be kwe tɛɛ ŋgùu waa wɛ̀ njo yòo tʉʼ ba yòo buu bbebep.	When you die sasswood medicine will cause your stomach to swell because of your evil deeds.
a yoñshi Nyúè, a bá'shi, a laa enáê, “Ca yu yaè nyor ce máè fa a weâe btuè. Ce gee neè aèmboè seèe ce geèe na tá weèe bo ce kuushi máè.”	"When he had given thanks, he broke it, and said, ""Take, eat. This is my body, which is broken for you. Do this in memory of me."""
Cɛ̀ʼ ce wɛ̀ sùʼsi anà zhi raa kaʼ.	The cloth that you have washed is not clean.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè wááwá byemïì yuu ca ka'. Beèe ce aède' a byemïì ku ba beèe ce Nyúè aè geèe ená woweèe a byemi.	"But he said to them, ""Not all men can receive this saying, but those to whom it is given."
AÈ m ba nyúè anaè beèe a mmbaa efa waâp mú a ce duè aè mú rla' mo' ce a m ce too ená Ámayoès. AÈ rnaètïû aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm duè aè rla' ca yi yu aèmboè mar saèambaê.	Behold, two of them were going that very day to a village named Emmaus, which was sixty stadia from Jerusalem.
AÈde' ñwáè sánïì ená ñwáè ce e ke ghoèni ñwáè, yu ñwáâ ñgoèr a caa ñwáè ce e ghoèni naè ka'.	But without any dispute the lesser is blessed by the greater.
Weèr ce loèr nfeè' neè ku' rfa ca, faè dïì' beèe mo' a lo ce de'ñger kuèu rfa anaè ka'.	We are avoiding this, that any man should blame us concerning this abundance which is administered by us.
Jisoès aè m koni muu jaèaki', a ko' a cu mbo, aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè naè. A m sañ mbo enáê,	Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it. As it is written,
Koni neè beèe ce a ce niñ weèe, gá' neè woweèe boèñboñ. Wee geèe wa' weèe fa ce de'ñger ka'.	Be hospitable to one another without grumbling.
M ce suñ weèe ená yuu ce a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘A m beè' ye aè múè ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep’ naè, yi be koni neè máè, ghááte njo. Neè mini-ñwáè, yuu ce a sañ aèmboè máè yi ce ghááte njo.”	"For I tell you that this which is written must still be fulfilled in me: 'He was counted with transgressors.' For that which concerns me has an end."""
E laèa buu ca mbe vi mñwaè' wááwá ce e sañ. Buu moè' yu mbe vi mñwaè' ce vi tap seê. Beèe ce a máñni buu a táá tatap ka', a loè beesi buu ca aè njáèá yaèp aèmboè a beèesi blaèa moè' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè naè. Yuu ce woweèe a ce geèe anaè yi be maè' ñgá' mbe waâp btuè.	as also in all of his letters, speaking in them of these things. In those, there are some things that are hard to understand, which the ignorant and unsettled twist, as they also do to the other Scriptures, to their own destruction.
Muu aè ka' baè' mnoèñ waami, a vú aè rgeèe búè muu. Beèe a m ce kwaè'shi ená a be cu' ba yïì taê.	It happened on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child; and they would have called him Zacharias, after the name of the father.
E mɛŋni buu sê.	He is very incapable.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce laèa wáná, ‘ka' ba ená aède' aè gee yuu mo'’ wa'a, a ce laèa ba ená ká? Buu wááwá yu aètáèr neè ñwáè ce e byemi.”	"Jesus said to him, ""If you can believe, all things are possible to him who believes."""
Ca yi m ba wa' tá yuu ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa, yi bo ghááte njo.	that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
E m ku túr seè'ni ba ñwáè moè'sir aè rtuu, ce aè m ba muu yïì ce e m koèñ magoèr. E m loè a tuu ye aèlúèsimbuèu, a ce kwaè'shi ená a be yu'ni neè muu yïì ca.	Therefore still having one, his beloved son, he sent him last to them, saying, 'They will respect my son.'
Yuu ce ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès aè m ce geèe naè yi m cïì' ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a ci' yïì beèe ce a m ba beèe Saduèsïî, woweèe a ko'ndoñ neè ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès seê.	But the high priest rose up, and all those who were with him (which is the sect of the Sadducees), and they were filled with jealousy,
Mɛ̀ riŋ à rsɛɛ ntàʼ brɛ̀reŋ.	I know how to make a bamboo chair.
Nyúè e loè gee yuu anaè yi túr njáèá nyor ce e koèñ ená yi ba túr. E loè gee buu jáá jáèá jáá vi túr nyor jáá jáèá jáá.	But God gives it a body even as it pleased him, and to each seed a body of its own.
A m túúshi beèe mo' efa woweèe neè bluèr a kweñgeèr, a gwate beèe mo' efa woweèe a teni bkúèkúâ bbaa. A m yúshi beèe mo' efa woweèe neè bkaèafaè'. Beèe ce a m ce yá ñgá' na a m ba ñgaâa fuèp. Woweèe a m ce yar ba mñgúp mbú. Beèe a m fa woweèe ñgá' a jar neè woweèe seê.	They were stoned. They were sawn apart. They were tempted. They were slain with the sword. They went around in sheep skins and in goat skins; being destitute, afflicted, ill-treated
Caè'ni neè btu embe coêr, ker ca'ni beèe Nyúè wááwá neè máè. Beèe Nyúè ce aè to' Italeè a caè'ni weèe foñ.	Greet all of your leaders and all the saints. The Italians greet you.
aè ka' ce ce tu embe coêr, aè ce ba ñwáè ce beèe a rïìñ ená e yu ñwáâ mboèñmboñ, a túr ñgwa moè'sir caè'caè', boo vi foñ a ba ñgaâa rbyemïì, yap ñgeèe aè ba njáèá ñgeèe ce aède' beèe a yá laa ená woweèe a ce geèe buu bbebep káè ená a teèe btu ka'.	if anyone is blameless, the husband of one wife, having children who believe, who are not accused of loose or unruly behavior.
Woweèe a ka' ce túúshi Stáfaèn neè bluèr, e loo a laa enáê, “Tata Jisoès, koo la ryoèñ.”	"They stoned Stephen as he called out, saying, ""Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!"""
E m kúti aè laè', a yá aèmboè muu yïì noèñ mbe bkuu, yú' nyúèrkaè' anaè yi banïì fúú enjep ye.	She went away to her house, and found the child having been laid on the bed, with the demon gone out.
Wáè koèñ ñgeâe boèñboñ, a baa ñgeâe bebep. A mbuèu ce Nyúè ce e yu yoè Nyúè aè ce wáè ená aè ba ñwáâ ñgoèr ce lu'shi caa bfúr wo.”	"You have loved righteousness, and hated iniquity; therefore God, your God, has anointed you with the oil of gladness above your fellows."""
a laa enáê, “Wáè ce aède' aè sa'sïì Ndap Nyúè, baè'ri aè mnoâñ btaar, jaè' laè yo tu. Yi ka' ba ená aè yu Muu Nyúè, suèu laè embe kïìntaa.”	"and saying, ""You who destroy the temple, and build it in three days, save yourself! If you are the Son of God, come down from the cross!"""
E ka' laèa wa'a, a ká' a ce lapni mla' faèdïì' ce e m geèe ku' buu bghagha' naè, njobeè' beâe aèfo a m kupse a ma' yaèp buu bbebep ka'.	Then he began to denounce the cities in which most of his mighty works had been done, because they didn't repent.
M ̀ be kwesi ce anà àyàŋsè.	I will kill that tree tomorrow.
Kuèu buu byáánïì njobeè' m ce duè aè ryá yaè Taê, tá weèe ker yá máè ka',	about righteousness, because I am going to my Father, and you won't see me any more;
Ñgá' ce koni weèr aè mnjïì wááwá, weèr aè ke' bornïì rfaè' ca ka'. E ba aè nfeè' moè' bfee vi jep weèr, ntee yi ke' kwe weèr efa rfaè' ca ka'.	We are pressed on every side, yet not crushed; perplexed, yet not to despair;
int.	not fit.
faè dïì' Sataèn lo túr ñger mbe seâe nduè ka'. Seèe rïìñ ená Sataèn yu kwáèá.	that no advantage may be gained over us by Satan; for we are not ignorant of his schemes.
Bfúr waè, aèmboè yi yu wa'a, baná weèe gheter gee ba buu ce vi be duèñshi ghup ená Nyúè aè ce weèe. Weèe aè ka' ce geèe wa'a weèe ke gwe rmoèoshïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Therefore, brothers, be more diligent to make your calling and election sure. For if you do these things, you will never stumble.
E m ce yá'ni mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá. Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ker ba beèe ce a m ba boo mlii, a m ce gheèter aè ryú ye.	He was teaching daily in the temple, but the chief priests and the scribes and the leading men among the people sought to destroy him.
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' máè yá máná ñwáè moè' aè ka' vú fe'shi aèmboè Jisoès moè' caa efa yïì ce weèr aè m feè'shi naè, weèe ku byemi. Ñwáè moè' ka' laa aèmboè yú' mo' ce yu yú' jáá, weèe ku byemi. Ñwáè moè' ka' fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ moè' ce e yu jáá efa yïì ce weèr aè m feè'shi aèmboè Jisos Kraâis naè, weèe ku byemi, koo buu ca wááwá mmbo mmbaa.	"For if he who comes preaches another Jesus, whom we did not preach, or if you receive a different spirit, which you did not receive, or a different ""good news"", which you did not accept, you put up with that well enough."
Yi yu ba ená weèe yu'ni ba neè Kraâis aèmboè Tataê, neè ye ntee-ñwáè. Tami neè nyor aè nfeè' wááwá aè rbeèesi ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' bipshi ená weèe suñ mbuèu efa yuu ce weèe cu ce keè'.	But sanctify the Lord God in your hearts; and always be ready to give an answer to everyone who asks you a reason concerning the hope that is in you, with humility and fear:
Ca yi ka' mïì wáá, Jisoès aè fúú, a ka' ce duè a yá aèmboè ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' moè' ce a m ce too ye ená Lávïì cu mbe yi dïû' rfaè'. Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè fa máâ mbuèu.”	"After these things he went out, and saw a tax collector named Levi sitting at the tax office, and said to him, ""Follow me!"""
E ke kèʼ bàŋrìbàŋrì àmbò nyɛ̀ɛ waʼa.	He looks suspicious like a thief.
Yuu ce Nyúè aè laèa yi yu ená e fa seèe ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Ryoèñ ca li ce loè ese muu yïì.	The testimony is this, that God gave to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son.
Weèe rïìñ yuu ce yi m koni aè ñgoâñ Judaè wááwá. Yi m káâ' aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, rfeè'shïì ce Joân aè m ce feè'shi tá e bo baèptir beèe naè li m banïì caa wáá.	you yourselves know what happened, which was proclaimed throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee, after the baptism which John preached;
Woweèe a m suñ yaèp buu bbebep ce a m geèe, e baptïìr woweèe njep rdip Jodaèn.	They were baptized by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
Wáè ka' ce geèe ñkaè', aè be ba ñgaâa fuèp, ba beèe ce a kepñger, ba mntáèñ, ba beèe ce a feèp.	But when you make a feast, ask the poor, the maimed, the lame, or the blind;
Yi yu foñ ená ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce aè m ba raèraâ Lávïì naè a m ba aèñgoo njobeè' aè m ba beèe ce a be loè kweñger, tá lap rfaè' li mïì.	Many, indeed, have been made priests, because they are hindered from continuing by death.
Moè' efa woweèe aè ka' yá ená e keè'se, a kúti a ce yoèp mbekïì seê, a ce yoèñshi Nyúè.	One of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back, glorifying God with a loud voice.
Yáê, e ce vúè mbe múè mmbaè'. Beèe wááwá a be yá ye. Beèe ce a m soèp ye neè rkoèñ a be yá ye foñ. Beâe aè bto' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na a be war ená a m ba riñ a m ba byemi neè ye. ÁÈno, yi yu wa'a.	Behold, he is coming with the clouds, and every eye will see him, including those who pierced him. All the tribes of the earth will mourn over him. Even so, Amen.
A tuñ seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aèbee aè baèptir ce a m baèptir seèe naè, yi ba ená seèe woweèe aè kweñger aèbee. A m geèe ená seèe woweèe kweñger aèbee tá seèe bo koni ryoèñ, geèe ba ñgeâe fi aèmboè Jisos Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe aè ñger Taèr Nyúè, a koni ryoèñ foñ naè.	We were buried therefore with him through baptism to death, that just like Christ was raised from the dead through the glory of the Father, so we also might walk in newness of life.
Woweèe a ka' yu' yuu ce ñkúú aè laèa, a nati a ce duè, a ku yá aèm boè rkaèñsïì ce woweèe a m yá kuè mbuèuntii naè li ce duè kuèntombïì neè woweèe caar a ba' a táá mbe dïì' ce muu anaè aè m ba.	They, having heard the king, went their way; and behold, the star, which they saw in the east, went before them, until it came and stood over where the young child was.
Felep aè m duè aè mú bu' rla' mo' aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè, a suñ aèmboè Kraâis anaè neè beâe aèfo.	Philip went down to the city of Samaria, and proclaimed to them the Christ.
Ñwáè ce e jaè' máè a sañ mú ñwaè' ca neè weèe a Sïìlïìvanoès. E yu nfúr ce m rïìñ máná e yu ñwáâ mini. Máè sañ tá m bo fa weèe ñger, keèr suñ weèe máná rboâñntee Nyúè li yu aèmboè máè m suñ weèe naè neè mini-ñwáè. Táá neè njo tatap.	Through Silvanus, our faithful brother, as I consider him, I have written to you briefly, exhorting, and testifying that this is the true grace of God in which you stand.
“M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè, baná e be geèe buu ce m ce geèe, keèr geèe buu ce vi caèa vi ce m ce geèe njobeè' m ce duè aè rcu weèr Taèr.	Most certainly I tell you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, he will do also; and he will do greater works than these, because I am going to my Father.
Baná weèe aè ka' ba yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e ce ko' mbe dïì' ce e m ba, a ka' vú naè, weèe aè ba laèa wee ká?	Then what if you would see the Son of Man ascending to where he was before?
[Mmbañruè a baa a be keè ba aè mñkúè, tá a lor moè', tá moè' cu aèfo.]”	nan
AÈ ka' ba aè lúèèsimbuèu, njeñwáè ca ye ye aè kwe.	After them all, the woman died.
Wèr à kumi à rlìp nzhɛ̀ɛ anà.	We have planned to beat that thief.
Baná seèe aè ba ce jaè' njáèá beèe ca tá seèe woweèe bo faè' aèbee aè rsuñ nsuñ ce mini.	We therefore ought to receive such, that we may be fellow workers for the truth.
E geèe ená wee weèe niñ njep múè bkoèr ce weèe aè m yá máè ce reè, a ker ce yu' seè'ni ená m ku bii reè na.	having the same conflict which you saw in me, and now hear is in me.
Ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a yu raèraâ Lávïì ce beèe a ke fa woweèe dïû' mo'sir efa buu ce woweèe a túr naè, a ke loè kweñger. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk, Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa ená e ku cu nteèe.	Here people who die receive tithes, but there one receives tithes of whom it is testified that he lives.
Josáèf ye ye aè m naètïû aè rla' Nasaráèt aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a du a ba' aè rla' Bátáèláèhám aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè. Rla' ca aè m ba rla' Dávïìd. E m duè aèfo njobeè' e m ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Dávïìd.	Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea, to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and family of David;
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Nyúè aè m geèe woweèe a máñnïì buu, a ce yá buu ka', a ker ce yu' buu ka', caar ba' ntïìni na.”	"According as it is written, ""God gave them a spirit of stupor, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not hear, to this very day."""
M ce suñ weèe ba yuu ce weèr aè m suñ weèe naè. Ñwáè moè' aè ka' ker fe'shi nsuñ mboèñmboñ moè' ce e yu jáá efa yïì ce weèr aè m feè'shi neè weèe, weèe aè yu' a byemi naè, ndoèo co' ye.	"As we have said before, so I now say again: if any man preaches to you any ""good news"" other than that which you received, let him be cursed."
a yááti aèwañ seè'ni na. Buu ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m sañ vi geèe buu ca aè yááti aèwañ neè beèe enje jáá. Nyúè ce e ce cu nfeseè aè m laèa ená buu ca yááti neè beèe enje jáá wa'a, tá bto' wááwá vi bo byemi, yu'ni neè ye.	nan
Ñwáè aè ka' baè' mbe dïû' rlúèshïì ca lúshi mbo, baná ñgaèñ be keèr faè' ka', aèmboè Nyúè ye ye aè m mïìsi li rfaè' a lúshïî, a ker fa' ka' naè.	For he who has entered into his rest has himself also rested from his works, as God did from his.
Kuushi neè ená beèe ce a ke faè' mbe Ndaèp Nyúè a ke ye efa buu ce beèe a fa rfa aègho mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, beèe ce a ke faè' mbe dïû' ntoèo rfa a ke ye ñgúè' moè' efa buu ce a tañshi tañshïì aègho.	Don't you know that those who serve around sacred things eat from the things of the temple, and those who wait on the altar have their portion with the altar?
Mnoèñ anaè vi ka' caèa, e laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Seèe kúti aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.”	"Then after this he said to the disciples, ""Let's go into Judea again."""
AÈde' weèr buu yer yu efa rlaèa yuu ce weèr aè yá a ker yu' ka'.”	"for we can't help telling the things which we saw and heard."""
E fùp sê.	He is very poor.
Woweèe a ka' naèa map mmir, a ker yá ñwáè moè' caa efa Jisoès ka'.	Lifting up their eyes, they saw no one, except Jesus alone.
Woweèe a m gweè aè nsheè a biñri, a waa a laa enáê, “Ndoèo! Ndoèo aè co' rla' ca. AÈ m ba entoèmbïì, beèe ce a m túr bkeñ bgoèrgoèr a ku' njo' rla' ca. Ku' buu ce rla' ca li m túr wááwá vi ku mi ba njaè' moè'sir.”	They cast dust on their heads, and cried, weeping and mourning, saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, in which all who had their ships in the sea were made rich by reason of her great wealth!' For in one hour is she made desolate.
Seèe yoñshi Nyúè ce e yu Nyúè a ba Taèr neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e m koosimnse neè seèe seê, e m geèe seèe aè ba beâe bfi njobeè' Jisos Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe. Ca yi geèe seèe aè ce keè' bti' ce aède' vi búteè, káè bep, káè kwe ncoèo ka', a ke' ce tarni ka'. A láè vi mbe buèu neè weèe,	Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who according to his great mercy became our father again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an incorruptible and undefiled inheritance that doesn't fade away, reserved in Heaven for you,
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Tataê, ca yi be keè koni ba fá?” E beesïì enáê, “E ke ba faèdïì' ce gúâú yuu yi yu, baná bjïìkaawaè vi be kaari aèfo.”	"They, answering, asked him, ""Where, Lord?"" He said to them, ""Where the body is, there will the vultures also be gathered together."""
E m laèa neè ye enáê, “Naèti mbekïì du yo yu, lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè, wáè ke'seè.”	"Then he said to him, ""Get up, and go your way. Your faith has healed you."""
A ka' yá ye, a lor ye a vú aègho aè rla' Antïìyoèk. Woweèe a m cu a ñgaâa cor weèe aè feè' bïìi, a yá'ni beèe magoèr seê. A m káè' a too ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès ená ñgaâa rbyemïì ba aè rla' Antïìyoèk.	When he had found him, he brought him to Antioch. It happened, that for a whole year they were gathered together with the assembly, and taught many people. The disciples were first called Christians in Antioch.
Yú' bebep ca yi m nyár ñwáè anaè a ma' aè nsheè, a waa, a fúú enjep ye.	The unclean spirit, convulsing him and crying with a loud voice, came out of him.
Cena a byee ce vi suèu embe buèu, ce ñwáè aè ka' ye, e ke kwe ka'.	This is the bread which comes down out of heaven, that anyone may eat of it and not die.
Pol aè m cu a bfúr weèe aè rla' Koreèn aè mú nfeè' moè', a ma'shi woweèe a niñ mbe keñ a Preèsilaè ba AÈkwilaè a du aè ñgoâñ Sirïìyaè. Tá woweèe a ka' duè, e m ye leè' aè rla' Sinkrïìyaè, a koo yi tu aèmboè ndeèe Jus aè m ba.	Paul, having stayed after this many more days, took his leave of the brothers, and sailed from there for Syria, together with Priscilla and Aquila. He shaved his head in Cenchreae, for he had a vow.
Pitaè ba ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a beesïì enáê, “Weèr be kuè yu'ni ba neè Nyúè caèa ce ená weèr yu'ni ba neè ñwáè.	"But Peter and the apostles answered, ""We must obey God rather than men."
M ce yu' rboèñ neè mncir Nyúè enjep máâ mbuèu ntee.	For I delight in God's law after the inward man,
Ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, Kraâis aè fa weèe Yú' Rara, yi ba neè weèe. Mbuèu moè' yu ce ñwáè moè' ker yá'ni weèe ka'. Yú' ce e m fa weèe naè yi be yá'ni weèe buu wááwá. Yú' ce e m fa yu yú' mini, aè ke' ba yú' mnde' ka'. Weèe ce cu aèbee weèe Kraâis weèe aèmboè yi m yá'ni weèe.	As for you, the anointing which you received from him remains in you, and you don't need for anyone to teach you. But as his anointing teaches you concerning all things, and is true, and is no lie, and even as it taught you, you will remain in him.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Tata ce koèñ aè rgeèe yuu aègho.”	"They said, ""The Lord needs it."""
E m rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená Nyúè túr ñger aè rgeèe yuu ce e m kaè' anaè.	and being fully assured that what he had promised, he was also able to perform.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Nyúè aè láè buu wááwá njep yeâ tïìi.” Ka' buu wááwá be keè ba njeptii Jisos Kraâis wa'a, yi yu rara ená Nyúè be keè ba njeptii Jisos Kraâis foñ ka' njobeè' yu ba ye ce e geèe buu ca wááwá aè ba njeptii Jisoès.	"For, ""He put all things in subjection under his feet."" But when he says, ""All things are put in subjection,"" it is evident that he is excepted who subjected all things to him."
Ñwáè moè' fa loèr ye aètáèr ka'. Jaè' neè ye tá e jár boèñboñ duè faèdïì' e ce duè tá e bo kúti vúè yá máè aèfa. Weèr bfúr ce aèfa weèe ce keè' ye.	Therefore let no one despise him. But set him forward on his journey in peace, that he may come to me; for I expect him with the brothers.
E laa enáê, “Jus a cu a fa ntañ ená a be laèa neè wáè ená aè vú neè Pol mbe kansuèr aèyaèñseè aèmboè woweèe a ce lá koèñ aè rniñ njep múè mnsa' ca boèñboñ wa'a.	"He said, ""The Jews have agreed to ask you to bring Paul down to the council tomorrow, as though intending to inquire somewhat more accurately concerning him."
Yàp tâa ce sɛɛ nyàa.	Their father is butchering an animal.
Bfúr waê, máè laèa wa'a njobeè' beèe mo' embe ndaèp Kloâo a suñ máè ená weèe yu cuâu mo'sir ka'.	For it has been reported to me concerning you, my brothers, by those who are from Chloe's household, that there are contentions among you.
Ŋkar zhì à ba ce bii bòŋboŋ kaʼ, e yɛ̀ɛŋger sèʼni.	His friend was not dancing well; he is now active.
M ce sañ neè weèe boo waê, njobeè' a foèosi weèe ye buu bbebep wáá aè rlii Jisos Kraêis.	I write to you, little children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake.
Ñgaâa rbyemïì embe cor ce aè rla' Babiloèn, ce Nyúè aè ce foñ aèmboè e ce weèe naè, a caè'ni weèe. Muu waâ Mak aè caè'ni weèe foñ.	She who is in Babylon, chosen together with you, greets you; and so does Mark, my son.
Pol ba AÈpoloès ba Pitaè a yu yeè beèe, ñgoèñ ca yu ye, ryoèñ yu le, rkwe aè ba le, buu ce vi yu seè'ni na, ba buu ce vi be keè ba, vi wááwá a yeè buu.	whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come. All are yours,
Gheèter yá ená wáè cu aè múè beèe neè rfúteè-ñwáè. Gheèter cu rcu rrara njobeè' ñwáè ka' tá cu njáèá rcu ca ka', e ke yá Nyúè ka'.	Follow after peace with all men, and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord,
Ŋgwe à ye ngʉp nè bbvʉp ŋwɛ̀.	The dog has eaten the fowl together with/including the bones.
Moè' efa woweèe aè ka' yu' wa'a, a cañ a lor kúèsha, a fúú njep mruè' ce mi ce bañshi, a fapte aè ñke', a fa neè ye ená e bo nyoñ.	Immediately one of them ran, and took a sponge, and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him a drink.
E ker bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Yi yu yi ká aèmboè weèe, weèe ce laèa ye weená m yu nda?” Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “A wáè Kraâis anaè.”	"He said to them, ""But who do you say that I am?"" Peter answered, ""You are the Christ."""
ñkur ntee anaè e geèe ñgeèe ñwáè yi boñ Nyúè. Yiseèe ñgeèe yi ka' boñ Nyúè, baná yi be geèe tá seèe lá mmir mbenduè Nyúè.	and perseverance, proven character; and proven character, hope:
Baná weèe aè m fúú a du ba aè ryá ká seê? Weèe aè m duè ba aè ryá ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè a? ÁÈno, m ce suñ weèe máná ñwáè ce weèe aè m yá anaè caèa ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	But why did you go out? To see a prophet? Yes, I tell you, and much more than a prophet.
Woweèe a ka' ce baè' njep ndeèe ñgoâñ Misïìyaè, a ce taè' aè rduè aè ñgoâñ Bïìtinïìyaè, Yú' Jisoès yi ma'shïì ená woweèe a du ka'.	When they had come opposite Mysia, they tried to go into Bithynia, but the Spirit didn't allow them.
A ye e ce jɛ̀r mʉnyaŋ ce vʉ̀ nà.	There he is walking and coming slowly.
E m koo ye a ma' njep rwee ce lúèsimbuèu yu aègho ka'. A ka' maè' njo a li' cuèu efa gho, a siñ neè ncoèo Nyúè. E m geèe wa'a tá e bo cu njo aè bfeè' ncúèkïì, keèr túr njïì aè rbo' beèe enjep ñgoèñ ka'. Bfeè' ncúèkïì ca vi mïì, tá a ku fúr ye enjo aè mú nfeè' moè'.	and cast him into the abyss, and shut it, and sealed it over him, that he should deceive the nations no more, until the thousand years were finished. After this, he must be freed for a short time.
Yàa Mutù à bep banɛ m̀ be kupshi.	My car is bad therefore I will repair it.
E bʉ̀r ŋwàʼ a maʼshi mbèŋ à gwe à ndùu mo.	He has opened the book and left it in the rain.
Woweèe a bááñgeèr seê, a laa enáê, “Njáèá ñwáè ca yu ba njáèá ñwáâ ká, ce ená fu' yi yu'ni neè ye, rdip li yu'nïì neè ye foñ?”	"The men marveled, saying, ""What kind of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"""
Koo yo mbaèa duê. AÈ kwaè'shi ba máè aè rlaè' weèe ñwáè ce e ba vú rfaè' elúèsimbuèu yáánïì.	Take that which is yours, and go your way. It is my desire to give to this last just as much as to you.
Ñwáè aè ka' lip wáè neè bo aè geè', aè beesïì geè' mo' neè ye foñ tá e lïîp. Ñwáè aè ka' koo yoè kuêr, aè ma'shïì e koo cáè' yïì enjep mú foñ.	To him who strikes you on the cheek, offer also the other; and from him who takes away your cloak, don't withhold your coat also.
Yi yu ená buu bbebep aè m vúè njep ñgoèñ na njo' ñwáè moè'sir, a vú neè rkwe. Yi ka' ba wa'a, rkwe li vú aènduè beèe wááwá njobeè' beèe wááwá a geèe buu bbebep.	Therefore, as sin entered into the world through one man, and death through sin; and so death passed to all men, because all sinned.
E sùu njep làʼ.	She has gone down to the compound.
Wèr à tàʼ ye a taʼ làr.	We searched unsuccessfully for him.
Yuu mo' ce weèr aè m ce kwaè'shi ená aède' yi ba ka', yi yu ená woweèe a m fa wap mnyor neè Tataê, a ker fa neè weèr foñ aèmboè Nyúè e koèñ.	This was not as we had hoped, but first they gave their own selves to the Lord, and to us through the will of God.
A mbuèu ce Kraâis aè m kwe a fúú efa rkwe. E m geèe wa'a tá e bo ba Tata neè beèe ce a kweñger ba beèe ce a cu bteèe.	For to this end Christ died, rose, and lived again, that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.
Ñwáè rfaè' anaè aè ka' fúú embe ndaèp, a tarte a ñwáè rfaè' moè' ce a ye a m ba neè rkaa foñ aè baèa mbaèa, a koo ye, a kaa aè ndoñ, a laa enáê, ‘Laè' ya mbaèa.’	"But that servant went out, and found one of his fellow servants, who owed him one hundred denarii, and he grabbed him, and took him by the throat, saying, 'Pay me what you owe!'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	18	29	Ñwáè rfaè' moè' anaè aè gwe njep yeâ tïìi, a bu' mmbo neè ye, a laa enáê, ‘Fa máè mú nfeè' moè' tá m roo mbaèa, laè' wáè aègho.’	So his fellow servant fell down at his feet and begged him, saying, 'Have patience with me, and I will repay you!'"
Wɛ̀ bɛ̀rni kù nduunjì a yɛ ye kaʼ a?	Have you looked along the road and have not seen him?
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' moè' Toâdaès aè nyáá a lor yïì nyor aè ñwáâ ñgoèr, mmbañruè ce a m ba aèmboè mjeèe kyeèe a du a yeâ mbuèu. A m yú ye, mmbañruè ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu a da'seè, yuu ce woweèe a m ce koèñ aè rgeèe naè yi bú aè cicïì.	For before these days Theudas rose up, making himself out to be somebody; to whom a number of men, about four hundred, joined themselves: who was slain; and all, as many as obeyed him, were dispersed, and came to nothing.
Be ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè geèe seèe aè riñ buu wááwá tá buu ca mïî.	but when that which is complete has come, then that which is partial will be done away with.
njobeè' buu enjep ñgoèñ vi loè ese Taèr ka', vi loè ese ñgoèñ. Buu enjep ñgoèñ ca yu buu bbebep ce nyor ce roèo, ba mbaèñ mmir aè rtúr buu wááwá ce aè ce yá, ker ba naèanyor aè buu ce aè túr.	For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, isn't the Father's, but is the world's.
Yi yu ená Nyúè aè fa beèe wááwá aè shañ nteèetu, tá e bo koosimnse neè woweèe wááwá.	For God has shut up all to disobedience, that he might have mercy on all.
E ker bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce roèo ba nda?” Woweèe a ker laa enáê, “Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt.”	"Again therefore he asked them, ""Who are you looking for?"" They said, ""Jesus of Nazareth."""
M ̀̀ be dù ser Bìŋkà nè mkùu.	I will go to Binka on foot.
Nàʼ yoo zhi yû?	Where are your own cows.
M ku ce geèe ba aèmboè Taèr aè suñ máè ená m geêe, tá ñgoèñ yi bo rïìñ ená máè koèñ ye. Naèti neè tá seèe du aè dïû' jáá.”	But that the world may know that I love the Father, and as the Father commanded me, even so I do. Arise, let us go from here.
Saimúèn aè laa enáê, “Loo neè neè Tata Nyúè neè máè ená yuu mo' efa yuu weèe aè laèa na yi fa koni máè ka'.”	"Simon answered, ""Pray for me to the Lord, that none of the things which you have spoken happen to me."""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè ma'shïì ená woweèe a gee buu ce a ce koèñ aè rgeèe, aè ba buu ce vi yu neè rïìtu-ñwáè. Bbyeèñge a kupse yuu ce ñwáè aè ba geèe, a ce geèe ba yuu ce ñwáè aè ba geèe ka'.	For this reason, God gave them up to vile passions. For their women changed the natural function into that which is against nature.
E ka' koo, buu bteèe caè ba beâe bgoèrgoèr caè a gwe njeptii njeèe anaè. Woweèe a m túr rluñ rmo'sir rmo'sir, a ker túr ghee ce a geèe neè gul yi mo'sir mo'sir, mgúr mo' ce mi m ce rúèú boèñboñ seê, mi ba njo, a táá aètu rloo beèe Nyúè.	Now when he had taken the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each one having a harp, and golden bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the saints.
Kraâis ka' ba njep weèe, ka' weêe mnyor vi kweñger njobeè' buu bbebep wa'a, weèe yu bteèe aè yú' njobeè' e geèe weèe aè ba byáánïì.	If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is alive because of righteousness.
Beèe Isráèl a yu ñgaâa bbaèa neè Nyúè njobeè' woweèe a kani Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ. Cena yu sá' neè weèe ce weèe yu beèe enje jáá. Ka' yi yu wa'a, e m ce woweèe a ku bii koèñ woweèe njobeè' wap btaê.	Concerning the Good News, they are enemies for your sake. But concerning the election, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.
Ñwáè ce e laèa ená e ce cu aèbee a Nyúè, ñgaèñ túr aè rcu aèmboè Jisoès aè m ce cu.	he who says he remains in him ought himself also to walk just like he walked.
A ba fyeèni mgúr ca tá yi caa btosïìn mjeèe mtaar tá a lor mbaèa anaè fa neè ñgaâa fuèp.” Woweèe a ka' laèa wa'a, a lapni njeñwáè ca seê.	"For this might have been sold for more than three hundred denarii, and given to the poor."" They grumbled against her."
Woweèe a ka' tuu neèñguu roè wáá, a cúú keñ aèwaâa roè, a ba seè'ni ba aè ñgoâñ Gáènásaráèt.	When they had crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
Mmbaè' vi vúê, a cete woweèe, njeèndoñ aè laa enjep múè mo enáê, “Cena yu muu waè ce m koèñ seê. Ce yu' neè yuu ce e ce laèa.”	"A cloud came, overshadowing them, and a voice came out of the cloud, ""This is my beloved Son. Listen to him."""
AÈde' ñwáè konïì ba njáèá sá' ká, ce e ka' túr buu enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá, lo bá li ryoèñ?	For what does it profit a man if he gains the whole world, and loses or forfeits his own self?
Ñwáè wááwá ce laèa boèñboñ kuu Dáèmitroès. Ka' yïì ndeâe mini foñ ce duèñshi wa'a. Wer weèr foñ ce laèa boèñboñ kuu ye. Wáè rïìñ wáná yuu ce weèr ce laèa yi yu mini.	Demetrius has the testimony of all, and of the truth itself; yes, we also testify, and you know that our testimony is true.
A lo a ká' a ce maè' bïìr mbe buèu. Ncïìndap Nyúè ce a ce too ená Maikáèl ba bcïìndap ce a m ba njep yeâ tïìi a m maè' bïìr a nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè. Nyaèa anaè ba vi bcïìndap a m maè' bïìr a Maikáèl weèe tatap seê.	There was war in the sky. Michael and his angels made war on the dragon. The dragon and his angels made war.
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená weêe mnyor yu ñgúè' moè' efa nyor Jisos kraâis a? Baná aède' ñwáè lor yïì nyor ce yu ñgúè' moè' efa nyor Jisos Kraêis, gee tá e ba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor kwaèraè a? Ka'! AÈtaè yi ba wa' ka'.	Don't you know that your bodies are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them members of a prostitute? May it never be!
Jisoès ce a too li rlii mo' ená Jostoès aè caè'ni weèe foñ. Ku ba beèe a mntaar ca ce a yu Jus aè múè beèe ce weèr woweèe ce faè'. Weèr woweèe ce faè' wa'a tá beèe a bo rïìñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè. Woweèe a fa máè ñger magoèr seê.	and Jesus who is called Justus. These are my only fellow workers for the Kingdom of God who are of the circumcision, men who have been a comfort to me.
Pitaè aè ker kani. E ka' kani wa'a, nduñgúp aè ku toñ.	Peter therefore denied it again, and immediately the rooster crowed.
E ka' yá Jisoès, a waa, a gwe njep yeâ tïìi, a ce war enáê, “Jisoès, Muu Nyúè embe buèu, yuu ce soè túr a ká? M ce loo neè wáè ená aè fa fa máè ñgá' ka'.”	"When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, ""What do I have to do with you, Jesus, you Son of the Most High God? I beg you, don't torment me!"""
Seemoè' yi yu ená ye ce OÈnásimoès aè m cañ ese wáè duè cu nfeè' múcaèr, e kúti bo cu weèe ye nfeseè.	For perhaps he was therefore separated from you for a while, that you would have him forever,
Ncir entoèmbïì ce mkaè'ni mi yu aègee mo yi yu enáê, “Yu'ni neè yo ta ba yo maê.” Mkaè'ni anaè mi yu enáê,	Honor your father and mother, which is the first commandment with a promise:
Seemoè' aèmboè máè m kúti a vú ka' naè, weèe ce kwaè'shi ená m yu njáèá ñwáè ce e ke kupse ntee aèfo aèfo. Waè' m ka' ce kwaè'shi yuu ce m be geèe, m kwa'shïì aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na ce a ke byemi yuu, ker lo kani naè a?	"When I therefore was thus determined, did I show fickleness? Or the things that I purpose, do I purpose according to the flesh, that with me there should be the ""Yes, yes"" and the ""No, no?"""
Beèe a ka' yu' wa'a, a bááñger aè ryá'nïì ce e m yá'ni anaè seê.	When the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his teaching.
Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená yi yu tatap neè ñwáè mbaèa aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.	"Jesus said to his disciples, ""Most certainly I say to you, a rich man will enter into the Kingdom of Heaven with difficulty."
Yuènismoès ce e yu muu weèe aè vúè a ye. E yu nfúr ce weèr koèñ seê. E ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès neè yi ntee wááwá. Woweèe a be suñ weèe buu ce vi koni weèr aèfa wááwá.	together with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother, who is one of you. They will make known to you everything that is going on here.
Kuèu yi ka' laa enáê, “M yu ñgúè' moè' efa nyor ka, njobeè' m yu bo ka',” waè' baná kuèu yi buu efa rba ñgúè' moè' efa nyor a?	"If the foot would say, ""Because I'm not the hand, I'm not part of the body,"" it is not therefore not part of the body."
A ka' duè aègho, a vú neè beèe ená a vú táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ, laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè be buu efa rlaèa yuu bebep aèmboè dïû' rara ca ba mncir Musïìs ka'.	"and set up false witnesses who said, ""This man never stops speaking blasphemous words against this holy place and the law."
Mɛ̀ ba du a koni ye kaʼ.	I went and did not meet him.
Wɛ̌ yùp ŋgùp nyàa à fa nè mɛ̀.	When you skin the animal, give the skin to me.
M ce kwaè'shi aè rduè njïû aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè ka' vúè caè'ni weèe.	But I will come to you when I have passed through Macedonia, for I am passing through Macedonia.
Beèe mo' a m vúè neè ñwáè moè' ce e m fuñre a ke' yi aè rlaèa yuu boèñboñ foñ ka', a bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e naa mi mmbo mbenduè ñwáè anaè, ja' ye.	They brought to him one who was deaf and had an impediment in his speech. They begged him to lay his hand on him.
Beèe wááwá a ye, a yu'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a baashïì bbábá' ce vi m báti, vi ruu aè mñkaèa saèambaê.	They all ate, and were filled. They took up seven baskets full of the broken pieces that were left over.
Weèe aè rïìñ yuu ce yi geèe ená ñwáè anaè fa vúè seè'ni ka', tá e bo loè vúè ba aè nfeè' yïì.	Now you know what is restraining him, to the end that he may be revealed in his own season.
beèe ce a m tááte aèfo a bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce fyáèá muu jaèaki' anaè njoká?”	"Some of those who stood there asked them, ""What are you doing, untying the young donkey?"""
Ka' cu, njeñwáè moâ' aè ñgoèñ anaè ce aè m ku ba njeñwáè efa múè beèe Kánaèn aè vúê, a waa, a laa enáê, “Tataê, Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè máè! Yú' nyúèrkaè' yi m niñ njep muu waè, e ce yu' ryañ seê.”	"Behold, a Canaanite woman came out from those borders, and cried, saying, ""Have mercy on me, Lord, you son of David! My daughter is severely demonized!"""
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè suèu embe buèu a laa enáê, “Sañ blaèa ca: ‘Ká' e seè'ni, mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a láè ntee neè Tata Jisoès wáá a ka' kwe.’ ” Yú' Nyúè yi beesïì enáê, “Yi yu wa'a, lap rfaè' li mïì. Woweèe a be lúèshi ce lu'shi, njobeè' sá' efa map mfaè' be duè a waâp mbuèu.”	"I heard the voice from heaven saying, ""Write, 'Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from now on.'"" ""Yes,"" says the Spirit, ""that they may rest from their labors; for their works follow with them."""
Weèr aè du a ba' aè rla' Sïìrakusaè a cu aèfo mnoâñ btaar.	Touching at Syracuse, we stayed there three days.
Máè yu' yuu mo' yi coo máè mbaè tuè' aèmboè njeèndoñ ma kúr beèe wa'a. Njeèndoñ anaè aè m ba aèmboè njeèndoñ rdip ce li ce gweè aè rkoñ wa'a, a ker wañger aèmboè mbeèñ wa'a. Njeèndoñ anaè aè m waa enáê, “AÈleèluyaè. Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Tataê, ce e túr buu wááwá mba yeâ mmboè, yu ñkúú enjep ñgoèñ na seè'ni.	"I heard something like the voice of a great multitude, and like the voice of many waters, and like the voice of mighty thunders, saying, ""Hallelujah! For the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns!"
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yu' ená Jisoès aè cipsi cuèu ese beèe Saduèsïî, woweèe a kuu nyor a vú a yá ye.	But the Pharisees, when they heard that he had silenced the Sadducees, gathered themselves together.
E m be geèe yuu mo' bebep ka'. Mnde' mi m be fúú eku yeâ cuèu ka'.	"who did not sin, ""neither was deceit found in his mouth."""
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Pol aè báá woweèe a laa enáê, “Beèe caê, máè yá máná liseèe rjáèr ca li be ba yáánïì ka'. Seèe ka' loâ aèfa baná yïìseèe buu be bep, tá keñ bep, tá beèe a kweñger foñ.”	"and said to them, ""Sirs, I perceive that the voyage will be with injury and much loss, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives."""
Njeŋwɛ̀ ca rìŋ à rkap tɛʼ sê.	This woman knows how to fold loincloth.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, Jus moâ' aè ñgoâñ Áshaè a m ba aèfo. Woweèe a ba vúè táá a wáâ bsii, laèa yuu, ce yi ka' ba ená woweèe a túr yuu kuu máè.	They ought to have been here before you, and to make accusation, if they had anything against me.
Sò kǔ jɛr mʉfɛ̀ɛ.	Let us walk gently.
Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, aè ka' riñ aè rfa buu bboèñboñ neè boo wee, yi ba yi ká aèmboè yeè Ta embe buèu. Mboè e be fa Yú' Rara neè beèe ce a loo ená e fa woweèe a?”	"If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?"""
Ce woweèe, lá woweèe rara neè yoè mini. Wo blaèa yu mini.	Sanctify them in your truth. Your word is truth.
Bdikïìn a túr aè rba beèe ce a túr bbyeèñge aèñgoo ka', ba beèe ce a ce keè' aè boo wap ba wap mndap boèñboñ.	Let servants be husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well.
“Be keèe be aè nfeè' ce Muu Ñwáè aè vúè neè yi foèo-ñwáè a bcïìndap Nyúè wááwá naè, tá e cu mbe yi kaèbaèraè' foèo,	"But when the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	32	tá beâe aè bto' wááwá a kaari, táá njep yeâ tïìi, tá e gapse woweèe nto' baa aèmboè gaèy e ke fúr njeèe efa múè mbú-ndoñ naè.	Before him all the nations will be gathered, and he will separate them one from another, as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	33	E be tár njeèe aè yi bo maè', tár mbú-ndoñ aè yi bo ñkoèp.	He will set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	34	Ñkúú e geèe wa' wáá, laa neè beâe aè yi bo maè' enáê, ‘Weèe yu beèe ce yeè ta aè ghoèni. Vúè neè koo bti', niñ mbe dïû' kúú ce Nyúè aè m kupshi a lá neè weèe káâ' aè nfeè' ce a m geèe ñgoèñ,	Then the King will tell those on his right hand, 'Come, blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	35	njobeè' njeè aè m ce yañ máè, weèe aè fa máè byee. Ntee yi m yuushi máè, weèe aè fa máè yuu no. Máè m ba kïìloè, weèe aè konïì máè.	for I was hungry, and you gave me food to eat. I was thirsty, and you gave me drink. I was a stranger, and you took me in.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	36	Máè m ba mbuèuriñ, weèe aè fa máè bcáè'. Máè m ce yañ, weèe aè vú a ca'ni máè. Máè m ba mbe shañ, weèe aè vú a ca'ni máè.’	I was naked, and you clothed me. I was sick, and you visited me. I was in prison, and you came to me.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	37	E ce laèa wa'a, beâe byáánïì caè a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Tataê, weèr aè m yá wáè ba aè se'ká, njeè aè ce yañ wáè, weèr aè fa wáè byee, káè ntee yi ce yuushi wáè weèr aè fa wáè yuu no?	Then the righteous will answer him, saying, 'Lord, when did we see you hungry, and feed you; or thirsty, and give you a drink?"
Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, “Yú' ce Nyúè aè fa neè seèe yi koèñ magoèr ená seèe ku yu'ni ba neè Nyúè.” Waè' yi laèa ba aè cicïì a?	"Or do you think that the Scripture says in vain, ""The Spirit who lives in us yearns jealously""?"
Agripaè aè laa neè Pol enáê, “AÂ kwaè'shi ená aède' aè ku lor nfeè' múcaècaèr wa'a, gee m ba ñwáè rbyemïì a?”	"Agrippa said to Paul, ""With a little persuasion are you trying to make me a Christian?"""
M ce koèñ ená weèe riñ ená Timotïì aè fúú embe shañ seè'ni. E ka' vú yá máè, tá m lor ye, weèr ye vú yá weèe.	Know that our brother Timothy has been freed, with whom, if he comes shortly, I will see you.
Kò kwâa ca du ghaʼ mbe ŋgòʼ.	Take this corn and crack it with the mill.
Beèe magoèr ce a yu entombïì seè'ni na, a be keèe ba elúèsimbuèu, tá beèe magoèr ce a yu elúèsimbuèu seè'ni na, a ba entombïì.	But many will be last who are first; and first who are last.
E ka' ce de' a ye, a ye a niñ mbe ndaèp, e yá ku' beèe aèmboè a cu mbo.	As he talked with him, he went in and found many gathered together.
A m yú ye njo' yïìseèe buu bbebep, Nyúè aè fúr ye efa rkwe tá seèe bo ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii.	who was delivered up for our trespasses, and was raised for our justification.
Seèe yu' rboèñ, lu'shi, ku'si Nyúè, njobeè' nfeè' aè gháá ce Muu Njeèe be tarshi bguèu. Ñgwa yïì aè tami nyor aè bguèu anaè foñ.	"Let us rejoice and be exceedingly glad, and let us give the glory to him. For the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his wife has made herself ready."""
Yàa tâ à tòʼsi mɛ̀ nè mbàŋ njobèʼ mɛ̀ dù ŋguu kaʼ.	My father pointed at me with a staff because I did not go for firewood.
Yu ba rkoèñnïì Kraâis ce li geèe ntee yi ce luèu weèr aè rgeèe njáèá buu ca, njobeè' weèr rïìñ ená ñwáè moè'sir ka' kwe aè btu beèe wááwá, baná beèe wááwá aè kweñger.	For the love of Christ constrains us; because we judge thus, that one died for all, therefore all died.
Baná weèe ker bii bkwaèa ka'. Weèe yu seè'ni ba boo. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèe yu boo Nyúè, baná weèe be koni buu wááwá ce e kupshi a lá neè boo vi naè.	So you are no longer a bondservant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ.
M ce laèa ba máná ñwáè moè' aè m be yá Taèr ka', ku ba ñwáè ce e m loè ese Nyúè ce e yá Taèr.	Not that anyone has seen the Father, except he who is from God. He has seen the Father.
Mluè mi koo ñkúú seê, aè ka' ba njobeè' e m ye leè' aè bsii beèe ce a m vúè ñkaè' ca, e laa ená a fa yuu ce e laèa ená a fa neè ye naè.	The king was grieved, but for the sake of his oaths, and of those who sat at the table with him, he commanded it to be given,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, buu bbaa vi yu ce aède' vi kupseè ka' njobeè' aède' Nyúè laa wa'a nya' ba mnde' ka'. Buu bbaa anaè a buu ce vi ce fa seèe ñger tá seèe ce seèe aè cañ a súni njeptii Nyúè seèe bo rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená seèe be koni buu ce Nyúè aè kaè' neè seèe.	that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to take hold of the hope set before us.
À ba tɛ ba nkapni kaʼ mor zhi ba lǒ efɛ̀?	If it was not a mystery where did the fire come from?
Jisos Kraâis aè m fa yïì nyor a seâe tuè, tá Nyúè bo foèosi seèe efa yïìseèe buu bbebep, tee seèe efa ñgeâe bbebep enjep ñgoèñ na. E m geèe ba yuu ce Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Ta aè m koèñ ená yi ba.	who gave himself for our sins, that he might deliver us out of this present evil age, according to the will of our God and Father--
Muu wàa à mʉ vʉ̂.	My child came.
Buu bbebep be keèr túr ñger mbe weâe nduè ka' njobeè' weèe ker bii njeptii mncir ka', weèe yu ba njeptii rboâñntee Nyúè.	For sin will not have dominion over you. For you are not under law, but under grace.
M ̀ be fʉʉ jùu mrʉ̀ʼ àyaŋse.	I will search for wine tomorrow.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Ncir entombïì yu ca: ‘Beèe Isráèl, yu' neè! Yïìseèe Tata Nyúè ku ba moè'sir.	"Jesus answered, ""The greatest is, 'Hear, Israel, the Lord our God, the Lord is one:"
Baná aèmboè cor ce yu'ni neè Kraâis naè, yi yu yáánïì ená bbyeèñge a yu'ni neè bduu wap aè buu wááwá.	But as the assembly is subject to Christ, so let the wives also be to their own husbands in everything.
E ka' laèa wa'a, beèe mo' efa múè ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a laa fa waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè ca ce bepsi rlii Nyúè.”	"Behold, some of the scribes said to themselves, ""This man blasphemes."""
Máè ka' fyá' a yá ñwáè moè' aè táá mbetar btábuèr ca a ba aèmboè muu ñwáè wa'a. E m maè' saèaro aè nyoèr, a cúú kúè cáè' ce a geèe neè guêl, nje ñguèñ.	And among the lampstands was one like a son of man, clothed with a robe reaching down to his feet, and with a golden sash around his chest.
weèe aè ka' fa rgú'shïì neè ñwáè ce e suèsi nyor naè, laa neè ye enáê, “Vúè cu mbe nta' boèñboñ ca,” laa neè ñwáè fuèp ca yi ba enáê, “Táá yo mbonaè, buwa'laèr aè sárnïì aè nsheè mbe máâ geñ mkuèu na,”	"and you pay special attention to him who wears the fine clothing, and say, ""Sit here in a good place;"" and you tell the poor man, ""Stand there,"" or ""Sit by my footstool;"""
E m ba neè rgha'nïì-ñwáè aè ryá ená beèe a byemi ka'. E m naèti, a ce kar aè mla' mo', a ce yá'ni beèe blaâa Nyúè.	He marveled because of their unbelief. He went around the villages teaching.
M ̀ be sùu mbà làʼ dù yɛ ye.	I will go down to the compound and see him.
Ku ba ye Nyúè ce e túr bfee. Seèe ku'si ye aè nfeè' sïìp njo' yuu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe! Yi yu wa'a.	nan
Yi ku ba ba ená ñgá' be koni seèe tá liseèe rfaè' ca li kwe ntaa ka', beèe a be keèr loèr ndap nyúè AÈtámïìs anaè aè yuu ka', tá nyúè ca seese ce beâe aè ñgoâñ Áshaè wááwá a ce caè'ni na, ker kúti ba yïì ce aède' beèe a yu'nïì neè ye ka'.”	"Not only is there danger that this our trade come into disrepute, but also that the temple of the great goddess Artemis will be counted as nothing, and her majesty destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worships."""
Buu ca vi ce duèñshi ená Nyúè rïìñ njáèá njïì ce e be jaè' yïì beèe efa ñgá', a ker riñ njáèá njïì ce e be fa ñgá' neè beâe bbebep caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce e be sa' ñgoèñ.	the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation and to keep the unrighteous under punishment for the day of judgment;
Gheèter vú tá ñgoèñ yi ka' fúte. Yuèbuloès ba Pudaèn ba Lainoès ba Klaâudïìyaè ker ba bfúr wááwá, a caè'ni wáè.	Be diligent to come before winter. Eubulus salutes you, as do Pudens, Linus, Claudia, and all the brothers.
Máè rïìñ máná woweèe a láè ntee aè rduè aèmbuèu Nyúè, a ke' riñ njïû mini ka'.	For I testify about them that they have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge.
Tǎatà à ta bor nje ndèe.	Tata has kicked the ball into the goal.
Woweèe a ka' niñ njep rsheè, a yá muu nsuènsuè moè' aèmboè e cu aè ñgúè' bo maè', a yar ñgaèbúlaâ mbúú. Nyor aè bañ woweèe seê.	Entering into the tomb, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, dressed in a white robe, and they were amazed.
Woweèe a ka' jáèr aè to' ca wááwá, baè' aè rla' Pafoès, a yá ñwáè fii moè' ce a m ce too ená Baâajisoès. E m ba ñwáè Jus ce e m ce bo' beèe ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	When they had gone through the island to Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a false prophet, a Jew, whose name was Bar Jesus,
[Felep aè laa enáê, “Wáè ka' byemi neè yo ntee-ñwáè, m baptïìr wáè.” E beesïì enáê, “Máè byemi ená Jisos Kraâis yu muu Nyúè.”]	nan
Woweèe a ka' duè baè' aè rla' Áfásoès, Pol aè ma'shïì Preèsilaè ba AÈkwilaè aèfo. E m du mbe ndaèp rloo a suñ Jus buu aèmboè Jisoès.	He came to Ephesus, and he left them there; but he himself entered into the synagogue, and reasoned with the Jews.
Koni bcòcò enjep mdip.	Scoop out the herbs from the water.
Geewa'a, beèe mo' efa waâp mú ce a m ba beâe aè to' Saiproès ba rla' Saèiren a m baè' aè rla' Antïìyoèk a fe'shi blaâa Nyúè neè beèe enje jáá foñ. Woweèe a m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Tata Jisoès neè beèe anaè.	But there were some of them, men of Cyprus and Cyrene, who, when they had come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists, preaching the Lord Jesus.
Ŋkar zhìi à koʼ ce, a ròo gwè.	His friend climbed a tree and almost fell.
Moè' efa buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe naè aè fa bcïìndap Nyúè saèamba ca bghee ce a geèe neè gul vi saèambaê. Rshentee Nyúè ce e ku ba nteèe aè nfeè' wááwá li m ba njep bghee anaè jiñ.	One of the four living creatures gave to the seven angels seven golden bowls full of the wrath of God, who lives forever and ever.
Yi ka' ba wa'a bfúr weêr, táá neè tatap, ku lá ba ryá'nïì ce weèr aè m yá'ni weèe a ker sañ neè weèe naè nje tuè.	So then, brothers, stand firm, and hold the traditions which you were taught by us, whether by word, or by letter.
Woweèe a m nyáá neè foèo-ñwáè a ce de' a Jisoès aèmboè li rkwe ce yi m ba ená e be kwe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, mïìsi li rfaè'.	who appeared in glory, and spoke of his departure, which he was about to accomplish at Jerusalem.
Máè rïìñ ñwáè Jisos Kraâis moè' ce a m loèr ye a du aègho mbe laèlaè rbuu. Káè ñwáè anaè aè m duè ba neè yïì nyor áè, káè e m duè ba neè yïì nyor ka' áè, m rïìñ ka'. Ñwáè ce e rïìñ ku ba Nyúè caè'caè'. Yu seè'ni bfeè' ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú aèmboè ca yi m koni.	I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body, I don't know, or whether out of the body, I don't know; God knows), such a one caught up into the third heaven.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe ce e m táá a ce keè'ni Jisoès, aè ka' yá aèmboè e kwe, e laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè m ba Muu Nyúè ghup.”	"When the centurion, who stood by opposite him, saw that he cried out like this and breathed his last, he said, ""Truly this man was the Son of God!"""
Woweèe a ka' yu', a laa a waâp mú enáê, “Ñwáè aè vúè neè byee a fa neè ye a?”	"The disciples therefore said one to another, ""Has anyone brought him something to eat?"""
AÈde' aè laa neè nfúroè enáê, ‘Nfúraè, naèa rlir tá m koo wáè mú ñkúè' ce enjo,’ ke' yá ntaañguu ce e yu wáè nje rlïìr naè ka' aè njáâá ká? Wáè ce aè yu ñwáè mbo'ni, fúr ntaañguu ce e yu nje rlïìr njep wáè wáá tá aè bo yá mú ñkúè' ce ce yi yu nje rlïìr nje nfúroè boèñboñ, ka' fúr.	Or how can you tell your brother, 'Brother, let me remove the speck of chaff that is in your eye,' when you yourself don't see the beam that is in your own eye? You hypocrite! First remove the beam from your own eye, and then you can see clearly to remove the speck of chaff that is in your brother's eye.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè weèe, beèe wááwá a rïìñ ená weèe yu beèe ce weèe ce yu'ni neè Tataê. M ce lu'shi neè weèe seê. Ka' yi yu wa'a, m ce koèñ máná weèe riñ yuu boèñboñ, máñni yuu bebep.	For your obedience has become known to all. I rejoice therefore over you. But I desire to have you wise in that which is good, but innocent in that which is evil.
E m koo nyaèa ce e m feese nyaèaroè naè a kyáá neè shañ anaè, e cu aègho aè bfeè' ncúèkïì. Nyaèa ca yu nyo ce e m ba eluâuñgoèñ, aè ba nyaèa ce a ce too rlii efa gho ená nyúèrkaè', a ker ce too rmo' ená Sataèn naè.	He seized the dragon, the old serpent, which is the devil and Satan, who deceives the whole inhabited earth, and bound him for a thousand years,
Beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a bipshïì neè Jisoès enáê, “Ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a láè ndeèe viseèe bta ka', a ce ye buu neè mmbo msii njoká?”	"The Pharisees and the scribes asked him, ""Why don't your disciples walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?"""
Ñwáè ryá'ni mncir anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè laèa yáánïì seê, ñwáè ryá'nïì. Wáè laèa mini wáná, Nyúè ku ba moè'sir, moè' ker ba ka', ku ba ye.	"The scribe said to him, ""Truly, teacher, you have said well that he is one, and there is none other but he,"
ÁÈpafraès ce e yu muu weèe, a ker ba ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis, aè caè'ni weèe. E ce loo neè weèe aè nfeè' wááwá ená Nyúè gee tá weèe táá tatap, ba aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ ená weèe aè ba ba, rïìñ buu ce Nyúè ce koèñ ená weèe aè ba geèe, geèe buu anaè wááwá.	Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, salutes you, always striving for you in his prayers, that you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.
Woweèe a taa ye mbe kïìntaa, a lor vi bcáè' a ma' kañ aègho, tá a bo yá aèmboè a be gaèp.	Crucifying him, they parted his garments among them, casting lots on them, what each should take.
Ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' ce wáp Nyúè, ce geèe yuu ce yi yu yáánïì, káè ñgaèñ yu ñwáâ aè to' efá áè, baná Nyúè be koo ye mmbo mmbaa.	but in every nation he who fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him.
Nyúè aè m ba fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe ka' yi ba ba ená le rbyemïì li yu aè cicïì, yeè buu bbebep aè ku bii mbe weâe btuè.	If Christ has not been raised, your faith is vain; you are still in your sins.
“Ñwáè aè ka' be wáè aè Ñkaâ' bguèu, aè fa cu ba mbe nta' yïû boèñboñ ka', njobeè' aède' yi ku ba ená ñgaèñ aè ba be ñwáè moè' ce e yu ñwáâ ñgoèr neè wáè.	"When you are invited by anyone to a marriage feast, don't sit in the best seat, since perhaps someone more honorable than you might be invited by him,
Luke	Luêk	14	9	Yi ka' ba wa'a baná ñwáè ce e ba be weèe ye naè be vúè laèa neè wáè enáê, ‘Naèti mbekïì tá ñwáè ca cu.’ E ce laèa wa'a, baná aè be naèti mbekïì neè rïìtu-ñwáè duè cu mbe mú nta' ká'.	and he who invited both of you would come and tell you, 'Make room for this person.' Then you would begin, with shame, to take the lowest place.
Luke	Luêk	14	10	A ka' be wáè aè ñkaè', aè cu ba mbe mú nta' ká', ñwáè ce e ba be weèe naè ka' vúê, tá e bo laèa neè wáè enáê, ‘Ñkaraè, naèti embo naè, cu mbe nta' boèñboñ ca.’ E ka' gee wa'a baná e naèa wáè mbekïì aè múè beèe ce e ba be naè.	But when you are invited, go and sit in the lowest place, so that when he who invited you comes, he may tell you, 'Friend, move up higher.' Then you will be honored in the presence of all who sit at the table with you.
Luke	Luêk	14	11	Yi yu ená ñwáè ce e ka' naa yïì nyor mbekïì baná a be suèusi ye njep nsheè. Ñwáè ce e ka' suusi yïì nyor njep nsheè baná a be naèa ye mbekïì.”	For everyone who exalts himself will be humbled, and whoever humbles himself will be exalted."
Ñgaâa ñgeèe cumúnyañ a ka' bye cumúnyañ aè múè beèe, e ku', baná a be kep ba ñgeâe boèñboñ.	Now the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace by those who make peace.
AÈde' m suñ weèe buu wááwá ce rbyemïì li m geèe beèe mo' foñ a gee ka'. M ka' lo ená m ce suñ, m suñ du ba' fá? Nfeè' yu aègho ce m suñ weèe aèmboè Gidïìyoèn, ba Baraèk, ba Saâmsïìn, ba Jáptaè, ba Dávïìd, ba Saâmwáèl ker ba beèe wááwá ce a m ce cep ntuu Nyúè ka'.	What more shall I say? For the time would fail me if I told of Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah, David, Samuel, and the prophets;
M ce bu' mmbo neè weèe seê, ená weèe loo neè weèr, tá m bo yaèñse koni fáñ keèr vúè yá weèe.	I strongly urge you to do this, that I may be restored to you sooner.
Woweèe a ká' a ce laèa fa waâp mú enáê, “E laèa wa'a njobeè' seèe aè ba vú neè bráâd ka'.”	"They reasoned with one another, saying, ""It's because we have no bread."""
baná ñwáè anaè ce naèa tu, a riñ yuu ka'. E ce señ buu, a ce sár mnsár aè mú blaèa jáá jáèá jáá. Cena yi geèe beèe a ce ko'ndoñ, a ce lapni, a ce cápni, beèe a ce kwaè'shi bebep kuu beèe mo'.	he is conceited, knowing nothing, but obsessed with arguments, disputes, and word battles, from which come envy, strife, insulting, evil suspicions,
AÈde' weèe ce naèa tu aè njáâá ká ce ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú ka' ce geèe njáèá yuu ca. Weèe aè ba ce war war. Weèe fúr ñwáè ca efa weâe mú.	You are puffed up, and didn't rather mourn, that he who had done this deed might be removed from among you.
Musïìs aè m ce kwaè'shi ená yïì beèe a be rïìñ ená e yu ñwáè ce Nyúè aè tuu ená e fúr woweèe efa ñgá'. Geewa'a, woweèe a riñ yap yu ka'.	He supposed that his brothers understood that God, by his hand, was giving them deliverance; but they didn't understand.
E ce yuʼ rbòŋ njobèʼ e càa ŋwàʼ.	He is feeling fine because he passed the exams.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, nfeè' ce Jus a m ce ye ñkaâ' btaèp aè ká' a ce gháá.	Now the feast of the Jews, the Feast of Booths, was at hand.
Ñwáè moè' ka' laa yi enáê. “M yu ya weèr Poêl,” moè' ker laa yi enáê, “M yu ya weèr AÈpoloès.” Waè' baná weèe yu jáá efa beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a?	"For when one says, ""I follow Paul,"" and another, ""I follow Apollos,"" aren't you fleshly?"
Woweèe a ka' yu' wa'a, a bááñger seê, a ma'shi ye, a duse.	When they heard it, they marveled, and left him, and went away.
Yuu ce ñwáè mbyeè buu ca ce byeè, yu nlaèa Nyúè.	The farmer sows the word.
Nsuu ca aè m ku ba yo nsuu tá aè ka' keè fyeèni, wáè ka' fyeèni mbaèa efa gho aè ba yo mbaèa. Wáè kwaè'shi aè rgeèe njáèá yuu ca njoká? Wáè nya' mnde' ba neè beèe ka', wáè nya' mnde' ba neè Nyúè”	"While you kept it, didn't it remain your own? After it was sold, wasn't it in your power? How is it that you have conceived this thing in your heart? You haven't lied to men, but to God."""
Bár ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce beèe nrúú a ka' yu' yuu ce a bipshi na, yi bep woweèe seê.	When the ten heard it, they were indignant with the two brothers.
Nyúè ce e m laèa enáê, “Maè'shi tá rraa li raa aè túè'nji,” yu ye ce e geèe li rraa li ce raa njep seâe mntee, tá seèe bo koni rraa, yá foèo Nyúè aèmboè yi ce raa aè bsii Kraêis.	"seeing it is God who said, ""Light will shine out of darkness,"" who has shone in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ."
Suñ beèe buu ca. Cep, ker lapni beèe neè ñger-ñwáè. Fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' lor wáè aètáèr ka'.	Say these things and exhort and reprove with all authority. Let no man despise you.
E m koèñ ená buu wááwá ce e m geèe káè yu vïì embe buèu áè, káè yu vïì enjep ñgoèñ áè, a kúti aèbee njïì enjep muu yïì. AÈ ka' ba njo' rkwe ce muu yïì anaè aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa, Nyúè aè gee buu enjep ñgoèñ ba vïì embe buèu, vi kútïì bkar a ye, a cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	and through him to reconcile all things to himself, by him, whether things on the earth, or things in the heavens, having made peace through the blood of his cross.
Wɛ̀ mʉ yɛ ŋgar cà a?	Did you see that gun?
Mɛ̀ tʉr yaa ŋwàʼ, ŋgʉ̀ʼ mòʼ à ba nsii, mòʼ à ba mbʉʉ.	I have my book; one side is black, the other is white.
M ce suñ weèe buu ca njobeè' Muu Ñwáè be vúè neè foèo yïì Taê, a vi bcïìndap weèe, laè' ñwáè wááwá aè buu ce e m ce geèe.	For the Son of Man will come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to everyone according to his deeds.
Yuu ce m ce laèa yi yu ená Nyúè aè m caèa embenjïì Kraâis a gee a beèe enjep ñgoèñ na weèe a kútïì aèbee, a ke' ce beè' yaèp buu bbebep ka'. E fa nsuñ ca mba weâr mmboè ená weèr suñ neè beèe.	namely, that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their trespasses, and having committed to us the word of reconciliation.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' yïì Saâmwáèl, woweèe a laa ená Nyúè fa woweèe ñkúú, Nyúè aè fa woweèe Sol ce e m ba muu Kïîsh, ce e m ba ñwáè embe ntáè' yïì Bánjamáèn. E m sa' kúú aè bfeè' mñkyeèe.	Afterward they asked for a king, and God gave to them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
Wèe tʉr à rkèʼni yee tu.	You have to take care of yourselves.
a seesi aèmboè a be geèe ka' koo Jisoès aè bfee, yú.	They took counsel together that they might take Jesus by deceit, and kill him.
M ̀ be fʉ dù ntaa.	I will go to market tomorrow.
Jisòs e ke gèe bèe a ce rlùŋ e.	Jesus saves people.
Woweèe a m suè' ye neè mcáp seê.	They spoke many other things against him, insulting him.
Máè yoèñshi weèe njobeè' weèe ce kuushi buu ce máè m yá'ni weèe, a ker ce geèe buu anaè yáánïì seê.	Now I praise you, brothers, that you remember me in all things, and hold firm the traditions, even as I delivered them to you.
E yu aèfa seè'ni na wa'a, beèe ce a yu btu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì a banïì fa ye ñger wáá ená e vú koo beèe ce a ce loo neè wáè, kur du aègho, fa mbe shañ.”	"Here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call on your name."""
Ku' beèe a vúê, a sir ye a tarte, e niñ mbe keñ a cu mbo, beèe anaè a táá nje waâa túè.	Great multitudes gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat, and sat, and all the multitude stood on the beach.
Jus ce a m ce cu aè rla' Antïìyoèk a ba ñgaâa rbyemïì foñ naè, a m koni ñgeâe cicïì ce Pitaè aè m ce geèe naè. Baènabaès ye ye aè m loè a ce geèe njáèá yap ñgeèe anaè.	And the rest of the Jews joined him in his hypocrisy; so that even Barnabas was carried away with their hypocrisy.
E ker bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “AÈ nfeè' máè m fa mntu' bráâd saèamba neè beèe ncúèkïì kyeèe naè, woweèe a m ye, weèe aè kwá' bbábá' aè mñkaâa bsá'?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr aè m kwáè' bbábá' aè mñkaèa saèambaê.”	"When the seven loaves fed the four thousand, how many baskets full of broken pieces did you take up? They told him, ""Seven."""
“AÈde' ñwáè cú' laêm, tár ba mbe dïì' ce beèe a be buu efa ryá káè lor ghee kúpshi aègho ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' cú' laêm, baná e be tár ba mbe tábuèr tá beèe ce a ce niñ mbe ndaèp a bo yá aèmboè ndap ce raa.	"No one, when he has lit a lamp, puts it in a cellar or under a basket, but on a stand, that those who come in may see the light.
Luke	Luêk	11	34	Mo mmir mi yu aèmboè lam wa'a neè yoè nyor. Mo mmir mi ka' ba mmboèñmboñ baná rraa li yu aè yoè nyor wááwá. Geewa'a, mo mmir mi ka' bep baná yoè nyor wááwá yu aè túè'nji.	The lamp of the body is the eye. Therefore when your eye is good, your whole body is also full of light; but when it is evil, your body also is full of darkness.
Luke	Luêk	11	35	Baná weèe lor nfeè' yá weená rraa enjep weèe na li fa ba ba túè'nji ka'.	Therefore see whether the light that is in you isn't darkness.
Luke	Luêk	11	36	Baná rraa li ka' ba aè yoè nyor wááwá, ñgúè' moè' ke' ba aè túè'nji ka', baná rraa anaè li be raa wáè aè nyoèr wááwá aèmboè a ke cúè' lam e raa ñwáè aè nyoèr wááwá naè.”	If therefore your whole body is full of light, having no part dark, it will be wholly full of light, as when the lamp with its bright shining gives you light."
Ñwáè ka' túr ñger aè rcep ntuu Nyúè, ker túr ñger aè rrïìñ buu Nyúè ce vi yu aè bsúèti, ker riñ buu wááwá, ker byemi neè Nyúè btatap seê, ce aède' e laêa, rtuèu li co'tïì embe dïì' li táá, du táá aè dïû' jáá, e ka' tá koèñ beèe ka', baná e ku ba ñwáè cicïì.	If I have the gift of prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge; and if I have all faith, so as to remove mountains, but don't have love, I am nothing.
A ŋkar zhì àmbò e tɛɛ nje waaŋkʉ̀ nà.	That is his friend standing across the river.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ca, a kwá' mbaèa anaè, a laa enáê, “Ncir yi byemi ená a lá mbaèa ca aè múè mbaèa embe Ndaèp Nyúè ka' njobeè' yu mbaèa bláá.”	"The chief priests took the pieces of silver, and said, ""It's not lawful to put them into the treasury, since it is the price of blood."""
AÈde' m naa tu njobeè' blaâa Nyúè ce m ce feè'shi neè weèe ka' njobeè' Nyúè aè m laèa neè máè ená m fe'shïî. Ndoèo be co' máè ce m ka' tá feè'shi ka'.	For if I preach the Good News, I have nothing to boast about; for necessity is laid on me; but woe is to me, if I don't preach the Good News.
Vi btuè' vi mú'ñgeèr, rlee li ba'ñgeèr ye, e ká' a ce laèa yáánïì.	Immediately his ears were opened, and the impediment of his tongue was released, and he spoke clearly.
Muu à diʼ a zhe njàp wɛɛ.	The child has finally eaten all the soup.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rboñshi li ryoèñ baná ñgaèñ be bá li, ñwáè ce e ka' tá boñshi li ryoèñ ka' njo' máè, baná ñgaèñ be koni li.	For whoever wants to save his life will lose it; and whoever will lose his life for my sake and the sake of the Good News will save it.
Woweèe a ka' vúèshi ye wáá, a co' cáâ' beer caè efa yeâ nyoèr, a lor vi bcáè', a kúsi ye aè nyoèr, a lor ye a du aègho aè rtaa mbe kïìntaa.	When they had mocked him, they took the robe off of him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away to crucify him.
M be kuè ce geèe yuu ce m ce geèe seè'ni na, faè dïì' beèe ce a ce koèñ aè ryu' nyor ená lap rfaè' li ku ba aèmboè ler naè a bo túr njïì moè' aè ryu' ka'.	But what I do, that I will do, that I may cut off occasion from them that desire an occasion, that in which they boast, they may be found even as we.
Muu anaè aè ku cañ a kúti, a du a laa neè ñkúú enáê, “M ce koèñ ená aè fa máè tu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe njep kañ seè'ni.”	"She came in immediately with haste to the king, and asked, ""I want you to give me right now the head of John the Baptizer on a platter."""
Weèr Pol weèe aè ka' maè'shi woweèe, a niñ mbe keñ a du a ba' aè rla' Koês, a táá aè dïì' mo' ka'. Túè' aè ka' raa weèr aè ba' aè rla' Rodoèn, a ka' loâ aèfo, a du a ba' aè rlaè' Pataraè.	When it happened that we had parted from them and had set sail, we came with a straight course to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
Ñwáè moè' ce e m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisoès aè m ba aè rla' Jopaè. Li rlii li m ba ená Taèbitaè; mbuèu efa rlii anaè aè ba ená Ñgap. E m ce geèe buu bboèñboñ seê, a ba mmbo mtoo.	Now there was at Joppa a certain disciple named Tabitha, which when translated, means Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and acts of mercy which she did.
“Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá kúú Nyúè yi ba aèmboè nfeè' ce boo mñgoèñgoè mo' beèe nrúú a m loèr wap blaêm, a du aè rkoni nduu-guèu.	"Then the Kingdom of Heaven will be like ten virgins, who took their lamps, and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	2	Bee nta efa waâp mú a m ba blúr, beèe nta a túr bfee.	Five of them were foolish, and five were wise.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	3	Beèe ce a m ba blúr naè a m loèr blaêm, a lor káèroèsin ka',	Those who were foolish, when they took their lamps, took no oil with them,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	4	beèe ce a m rïìñ buu naè a lá káèroèsin aè mú bgaloèn, a túr aègee waêp blaêm.	but the wise took oil in their vessels with their lamps.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	5	Nduu-guèu a cu seê, mmirloè mi koo woweèe, woweèe a buumïì.	Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	6	AÈ ka' ba neè ntee-tú', ñwáè aè fuñ, a laa enáê, ‘A nduu-guèu e ce vúè naè, Fúú neè koni ye.’	But at midnight there was a cry, 'Behold! The bridegroom is coming! Come out to meet him!'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	7	Boo mñgoèñgoè anaè a lá'seè efa mmirloè, a ko'si waêp blaêm.	Then all those virgins arose, and trimmed their lamps.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	8	Beèe ce a m ba blúr naè, a laa neè beèe ce a m túr bfee naè enáê, ‘Fa neè weèr yeè káèroèsin anaè moè' njobeè' weêr blam vi ce liiti.’	The foolish said to the wise, 'Give us some of your oil, for our lamps are going out.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	9	Beèe ce a m túr bfee naè a beesïì enáê, ‘Weèr aè ka' gee wa'a, e ghááteè neè seèe wááwá ka'. Duè neè yá beèe ce a ce fyeèni, yuu yeè.’	But the wise answered, saying, 'What if there isn't enough for us and you? You go rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	10	Woweèe a ka' duè aè ryuu, nduu-guèu aè ba'sïì, beèe ce a m tami nyor naè a du a nduu-guèu weèe mbe ndaèp aè rye Ñkaâ' bguèu, a cete keèñ.	While they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and those who were ready went in with him to the marriage feast, and the door was shut.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	11	Boo mñgoèñgoè mo' caè a lo a vúê, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè Masaè, múè' keèñ neè weèr.’	Afterward the other virgins also came, saying, 'Lord, Lord, open to us.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	12	E beesïì yi yu enáê, ‘M ce laèa neè weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená m rïìñ weèe ka'.’	But he answered, 'Most certainly I tell you, I don't know you.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	13	Baná weèe fa ce buumi ka' njobeè' weèe rïìñ noèñ káè awaè ka'.	Watch therefore, for you don't know the day nor the hour in which the Son of Man is coming.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	14	“Kúú Nyúè yi be ba foñ aèmboè aè nfeè' ce ñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rduè aè mbeè, a ká' yi ñgaâa mfaè', a lá yïì buu neè woweèe.	For it is like a man, going into another country, who called his own servants, and entrusted his goods to them."
Lávïì aè ba muu Simïìyoèn, Simïìyoèn aè ba muu Judaè, Judaè aè ba muu Josáèf, Josáèf aè ba muu Jonaèm, Jonaèm aè ba muu ÁÈliyakïìm,	the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonan, the son of Eliakim,
Baná a m maè' mncir ce vi m ba entombïì njobeè' vi m túr ñger aè rjaè' beèe ka'.	For there is an annulling of a foregoing commandment because of its weakness and uselessness
njobeè' Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa enáê, “Abraèham aè m byemi neè Nyúè, Nyúè aè lor ye aè ñwáâ nyáánïì njo' li rbyemïì.”	"For what does the Scripture say? ""Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for righteousness."""
Beèe ce a m kúti anaè aè m ba Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè, ba Joèanaè, ba Máèári ce e m ba ma yïì Jáêms. Woweèe ba bbyeèñge mo' ce a woweèe a m ba naè a m suñ buu ca neè ñgaâa ntuu anaè.	Now they were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother of James. The other women with them told these things to the apostles.
Zhi ce yɛti enɛ bèe à duse à mkʉʉ wɛɛwɛ.	It appears that everyone has gone to the farm.
M ce laèa wa'a a ce fa ba rsa' ka'. M ce koèñ ba aè rfeè' le rkoèñnïì aè rkoèñnïì lïû beèe mo', tá m bo yá máná le rkoèñnïì anaè li yu mini lá.	I speak not by way of commandment, but as proving through the earnestness of others the sincerity also of your love.
E m koo ye aè boè, a laa neè ye ená, “Taèlitaè, kumïì,” ce mbuèu efa gho yu enáê, “Muunje, m ce laa neè wáè, loè mbekïì.”	"Taking the child by the hand, he said to her, ""Talitha cumi!"" which means, being interpreted, ""Girl, I tell you, get up!"""
Fa bepsi rfaâ' Nyúè njo' byee ka'. Nyúè aè kani seèe efa rye njáèá byee mo' ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, wáè ka' ye yuu ce yi be geèe tá nfúroè gweê, baná wáè geèe yuu bebep.	Don't overthrow God's work for food's sake. All things indeed are clean, however it is evil for that man who creates a stumbling block by eating.
Máè yu' yuu ce weèe ce geèe, a bááñger seê. Nyúè aè m ká' weèe ená weèe ba yïì beèe njo' yuu boèñboñ ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe neè weèe. Ka' Nyúè aè m geèe wa'a, weèe aè beesïì njïì neè ye cárcár seê, a ce duè ba aèmbuèu nsuñ moè' ce weèe ce kwaè'shi ená a nsuñ mboèñmboñ.	"I marvel that you are so quickly deserting him who called you in the grace of Christ to a different ""good news"";"
E m ce weèr wa'a tá weèr ce weèr aè m ba beèe entoèmbïì aè rláè mmir mbenduè Jisos Kraâis bo geèe tá beèe a yá yi foèo, ce kuè'si ye.	to the end that we should be to the praise of his glory, we who had before hoped in Christ:
Mmbañruè foñ a ba koèñ wap bbyeèñge aèmboè a koèñ wap mnyor naè. Ñwáè aè ka' koñ ñgwa yïì, baná e koèñ yïì nyor.	Even so husbands also ought to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.
Túè' aè ka' raa, woweèe a kútïì yap mbe barakïì, ñgaâa mnyaèabaèraè' a du a Pol weèe.	But on the next day they left the horsemen to go with him, and returned to the barracks.
E yɛ à jaja.	He is seeing without the use of witchcraft.
Yá'ni woweèe njobeè' nfeè' moè' be ba ce beèe a be keèr koèñ aè ryu' ryá'nïì ce li yu mini ka', koèñ ba aè rgeèe buu ce woweèe aè gwáá. Yi ba wa'a tá woweèe a ká' ku' ñgaâa ryá'nïì mo' ená a vú yá'ni woweèe ba buu ce woweèe a koèñ.	For the time will come when they will not listen to the sound doctrine, but, having itching ears, will heap up for themselves teachers after their own lusts;
Dù toŋ ye enɛ e lɛ vʉ̂.	Go and call him to come.
Nyúè aè m laèa neè Fároè mbe yeâ ñwaè' enáê, “Máè ko'si wáè mbe kúú, tá m bo duèñshi ya ñger njïì enjep wáè, tá la rlii li bo yu'ti aè ñgoèñ wááwá.”	"For the Scripture says to Pharaoh, ""For this very purpose I caused you to be raised up, that I might show in you my power, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth."""
Máè m ce wáp wáè seê, njobeè' aè yu ñwáâ ntatap. Wáâ ke kep yuu ce wáè m byeè ka', kap yuu ce wáè m ñwañ ka'.’	for I feared you, because you are an exacting man. You take up that which you didn't lay down, and reap that which you didn't sow.'
À be fò ba kɛ enjep rfàʼ anà.	What will you benefit from that job.
Baènabaès ba Sol a ka' mïìsi yuu ce woweèe a m duè aè rgeèe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a kúti. A ka' ce kúti, a lor Joèn Maêk.	Barnabas and Saul returned to Jerusalem, when they had fulfilled their service, also taking with them John whose surname was Mark.
Gheèter gee ñgeâe boèñboñ neè Nyúè tá e bo yu' rboèñ neè wáè. Ba ñwáè rfaè' ce aède' rïìtu yi koo ye ka', ker ba ñwáè ce e be ce yá'ni beèe blaâa mini yáánïì.	Give diligence to present yourself approved by God, a workman who doesn't need to be ashamed, properly handling the Word of Truth.
Laèa buu ca ker yá'ni vi.	Command and teach these things.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' mncir anaè, yuu bebep yi konïì fáñ a bo' máè, a yú máè.	for sin, finding occasion through the commandment, deceived me, and through it killed me.
E ka' ce loo, njeè aè ka' káè' ce yañ ye, e koñ aè rye yuu. A ka' ce fáèr byee neè ye, e yá njáèá rlo mo'.	He became hungry and desired to eat, but while they were preparing, he fell into a trance.
Rïìñ neè ená yuu ce a súèti, yi be keè yááti aèwañ, tá yuu ce a tá'shi yi yááti aèwañ foñ.	For there is nothing hidden, except that it should be made known; neither was anything made secret, but that it should come to light.
Bèesi cɛ̀ʼ àbʉ̀ʉsi.	Turn the frontal part of the cloth to the front.
“Yu' neè ñgaèa moè'. Ñwáè moè' aè m faè' yi nsuu, a bye njáèá msini ce a ke geèe mruè' aègho mbo, a bee ñka' a sir nsuu anaè aègho, a tuñ dïì' ce a bo geèe mruè' mbo a boo taè'taè' mbo foñ. E ka' geèe wa' wáá, a lá nsuu anaè neè beèe mo', a du aè mbeè.	"Hear another parable. There was a man who was a master of a household, who planted a vineyard, set a hedge about it, dug a winepress in it, built a tower, leased it out to farmers, and went into another country.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	34	Nfeè' ce a ke tee msini anaè aè ka' gháá, e tuu yi ñgaâa mfaè' ená a du yá beèe ce e m láè nsuu neè woweèe naè, koo msini mi.	When the season for the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to the farmers, to receive his fruit.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	35	Beèe anaè a koo ñgaâa mfaè' anaè a lip moè' a yú moè', a túúshi moè' neè bluèr.	The farmers took his servants, beat one, killed another, and stoned another.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	36	E ker tuu ñgaâa mfaè' mo' aèñgoo a caa beèe ce e m tuu entombïì naè, beèe anaè a koo woweèe a ku gee neè woweèe aèmboè a m geèe neè ñgaâa mfaè' ce entombïì naè.	Again, he sent other servants more than the first: and they treated them the same way.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	37	E lo a tuu muu yïì aè lúèsimbuèu, a laa enáê, ‘Woweèe a be yu'ni neè muu waè.’	But afterward he sent to them his son, saying, 'They will respect my son.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	38	Beèe anaè a ka' yá muu anaè, a laa a waâp mú enáê, ‘A ñwáè ce e be ye bti' na, vúè neè tá seèe yú ye, ye vi bti' anaè.’	But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, 'This is the heir. Come, let's kill him, and seize his inheritance.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	39	Woweèe a koo ye, a fúr embe múè nsuu, a yú.	So they took him, and threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	21	40	Baná ñwáè nsuu aè ka' kúti, e gee eká neè beèe ce e m láè nsuu neè woweèe anaè?”	When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?"
Yuu ce yi yu aètáèr yu ba yïû fá? Yu ba aè rlaèa ená, ‘Máè foèosi wáè efa yoè buu bbebep’, káè aè rlaèa ená, ‘Loè mbekïì, jáêr’?	For which is easier, to say, 'Your sins are forgiven;' or to say, 'Get up, and walk?'
Mɛ̀ kòŋ ye magòr.	I love him greatly.
Wee weèe rïìñ ená weèe aè ba geèe ba ñgeèe ce weèr aè m ce geèe. Weèr aè m ba a weâe mú a ce koosi bbor ka'.	For you know how you ought to imitate us. For we didn't behave ourselves rebelliously among you,
Njáèá ñgeèe ca yi fa keè ba fa weâe mú ka'. Yi yu ba ená ñwáè efa weâe mú ce e ka' koèñ aè rba ñwáâ ñgoèr, baná ñgaèñ ba ñwáè rfaè' neè weèe,	But it shall not be so among you, but whoever wants to become great among you shall be your servant.
Ŋkàr zhìi e ke gèe ŋgèe yàkì-yàkì sê.	His friend behaves in a very rough manner.
Laèa neè bbyeèñge ce a yu bleebeèe foñ ená woweèe a gee ñgeèe ce yi yu neè ryu'nïì-ñwáè. Woweèe a fa tee mnde' mbe tu beèe mo', káè ba bkwaèa neè mruè' ka'. Woweèe a yá'ni beèe ba buu bboèñboñ,	and that older women likewise be reverent in behavior, not slanderers nor enslaved to much wine, teachers of that which is good;
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈde' seèe laa seená kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ká? Yu njáèá ñgaèa ce efá ce aède' seèe ma' ka' riñ aèmboè kúú Nyúè yi yu?	"He said, ""How will we liken the Kingdom of God? Or with what parable will we illustrate it?"
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa enáê, “M be bipshi yuu mo' neè weèe foñ.	"He answered them, ""I also will ask you one question. Tell me:"
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa wáp ka'. Duè neè suñ bfúr wa ená woweèe a du aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. Woweèe a be baè' aèfo, yá máè.”	"Then Jesus said to them, ""Don't be afraid. Go tell my brothers that they should go into Galilee, and there they will see me."""
E jèʼsi mɛ̀ nè bôr.	He has dribbled me with the ball.
Túè' moè' aè ka' keèr raa, woweèe a ba' aè rla' Sisaèriyaè. Koèniyuès aè m cu a ce keè' woweèe, a ká'shi beèe ce a woweèe a m raète, ba bkar vi vi mntee, woweèe a vú mbe yeâ ndaèp.	On the next day they entered into Caesarea. Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his relatives and his near friends.
Ñwáè anaè aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Masaè, e ke ba aè nfeè' ce túè aè bañti m túr ñwáè ce e lor máè duè aègho njo ka'. Má loâ gheèter aè nfeè' anaè ená m du njo, ñwáè moè' ku du entombïì neè máè.”	"The sick man answered him, ""Sir, I have no one to put me into the pool when the water is stirred up, but while I'm coming, another steps down before me."""
Wáè m geèe yi nta' yi sáteè embe nta' bcïìndap Nyúè aè mú nfeè' moè', mú nfeè' anaè aè ka' caèa, wáè fa ye nta' kúú ba ryu'nïì,	You made him a little lower than the angels. You crowned him with glory and honor.
Geewa'a Jisoès aè m ce laèa aèmboè Ndap Nyúè ca, a ce laèa ba aèmboè yïì nyor.	But he spoke of the temple of his body.
Judaè aè m bi Páráès ba Saráè ce yaèp ma aè m ba Tamaèr. Páráès aè bi Ásiroèm, Ásiroèm aè bi Raêm.	Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah by Tamar. Perez became the father of Hezron. Hezron became the father of Ram.
M ce suñ weèe máná, e be sa' wap mnsa' tá vi ba yáánïì aè mbeèp yaèp, sa' vi cárcár seê. Ka' yi yu wa'a, waè' Muu Ñwáè be keè vúè, tá e yá beèe enjep ñgoèñ ce a byemi, aèmboè a táá tatap a?”	"I tell you that he will avenge them quickly. Nevertheless, when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on the earth?"""
Njàp ca yu còŋri.	This soup has no salt or pepper.
Nfeè' aè gháá ce Nyúè be sa' ñgoèñ ca. Nfeè' aè gháá ce a be so ñkúú enjep ñgoèñ ca.	Now is the judgment of this world. Now the prince of this world will be cast out.
Geewa'a, weèr rïìñ faèdïì' ce ñwáè ca ce vúè, a riñ ená be ba aè nfeè' ce Kraâis anaè aè nyáá, tá ñwáè riñ faèdïì' e loè ka'.”	"However we know where this man comes from, but when the Christ comes, no one will know where he comes from."""
Noâñ Ñkaâ' Pántikoès yi ka' gháá, woweèe wááwá a ba aèbee mbe dïû' moè'sir.	Now when the day of Pentecost had come, they were all with one accord in one place.
Tata aè beesïì enáê, “Baná ñwáè rfaè' ce e yu ñwáâ mini a ker riñ buu foñ seê, yu nda? Yu ñwáè ce yïì masaè aè láè yïì ndap ená e ce fyá', ce fa byee neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' njep nfeè'.	"The Lord said, ""Who then is the faithful and wise steward, whom his lord will set over his household, to give them their portion of food at the right times?"
Weèr ce yá ñgá' ca tá weèe bo koni sá' efa gho, tá beèe magoèr a koni rboèñ Nyúè, ce kuè'si ye goèr. Yi ka' ba wa'a, beèe magoèr a násïì ye.	For all things are for your sakes, that the grace, being multiplied through the many, may cause the thanksgiving to abound to the glory of God.
Beèe Farïìsi ba Jus wááwá a ka' tá suè'si mmbo aèmboè ndeèe waêp bta aè m ba ka', a ye yuu ka'.	(For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, don't eat unless they wash their hands and forearms, holding to the tradition of the elders.
Nàʼ yàa à gwè.	My cow has fallen.
Weèe rïìñ ená Kraâis aè m vúè aè rcaè'si buu bbebep. Yuu bebep yi yu njep yeâ ntee ka'.	You know that he was revealed to take away our sins, and in him is no sin.
a no mdip ce mi m fúú ba enje ryáá. Ryáá anaè aè m ba Jisos Kraâis ce e m ce jáèr a woweèe.	and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they drank of a spiritual rock that followed them, and the rock was Christ.
E ba kani a kʉti a byemi.	He refused and finally accepted.
A sañ mbe ye ñwaè' mncir enáê, ‘beèe a mmbaa a ka' táá njïìnsa' aè yuu baná yuu anaè yi yu mini.’	It's also written in your law that the testimony of two people is valid.
Fa maè'shi tá woweèe a ker du aèmbuèu mghaèghar Juês, káè keèr yu'ni neè rsa' ce beèe ce a kani yuu mini a fa naè ka'.	not paying attention to Jewish fables and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
Pailáèt aè ka' yu' blaèa ca, a koñ ená e ba maè'shi Jisoès tá e duê. Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jus a ce waani enáê, “Wáè ka' ma'shi ñwáè ca e duê, baná aè yu ñkar Sisaè ka'. è ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' lor yïì nyor aè ñkúú baná ñgaèñ aè tár Sisaè mkuèu mbe tuè.”	"At this, Pilate was seeking to release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, ""If you release this man, you aren't Caesar's friend! Everyone who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar!"""
Nduunjì ca zhi lɛʼ, a du mbà Mòo.	This road has branched to Moo.
Máè yá bcïìndap Nyúè saèamba ce a ke táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè. A m fa woweèe msoèñ saèambaê.	I saw the seven angels who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
Jus a ker ba jáá efa beèe enje jáá ka'. Kraâis yu Tata neè woweèe wááwá. E ke ghoèni ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' war neè ye.	For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek; for the same Lord is Lord of all, and is rich to all who call on him.
Bfee vi Nyúè vi yu jáá. E m geèe ená beèe a riñ ye ba neè bfee wap ka'. E m koèñ ená e gee beèe ce a byemi neè ye a luñ njïì enjep rfeè'shïì ce beèe a loèr aè yuu cicïì naè.	For seeing that in the wisdom of God, the world through its wisdom didn't know God, it was God's good pleasure through the foolishness of the preaching to save those who believe.
M ce suñ weèe máná ñgaèñ aè ka' tá naèti mbekïì fa neè ye njobeè' e yu ñkar yïì ka', baná e be naèti mbekïì fa ye yuu wááwá ce e ce roèo njobeè' e laèa a tambú.	I tell you, although he will not rise and give it to him because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence, he will get up and give him as many as he needs.
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' tee tu neè beèe ce a ce sa' beèe, baná ñgaèñ aè teèe tu neè yuu ce Nyúè aè geèe. Beèe ce a ka' gee wa'a, baná woweèe a ce ká' ñgá' mbe waâp btuè.	Therefore he who resists the authority, withstands the ordinance of God; and those who withstand will receive to themselves judgment.
Beèe magoèr a loèr nfeè' a sañ buu ce vi m koni a seâe mú.	Since many have undertaken to set in order a narrative concerning those matters which have been fulfilled among us,
Bkar waê, weèe fa leèse ená noâñ mo'sir yi yu aè bsii Nyúè aèmboè bfeè' ncúèkïì, bfeè' ncúèkïì vi ba aèmboè noâñ mo'sir ka'.	But don't forget this one thing, beloved, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
Beèe mo' efa weâr mú a vúâ aè ñgoâñ Kreêt, ba aè ñgoâñ AÈrábïìyaè. Woweèe a ce suñ njáèá buu bbáèá ce Nyúè aè geèe seèe aè ce yu' aè viseèe bli wááwá.”	"Cretans and Arabians: we hear them speaking in our languages the mighty works of God!"""
Muu Háèrodïìyaè ce njeñwáè aè m vúè a bii bii, nyoèr aè boñ Hároèd ba beèe ce a m vúè ñkaè'. Awá Hároèd aè laèa neè muu ana enáê, “Wáè ka' bipshi ka' njáèá ká ce wáè koèñ, m ku fa neè wáè.”	"When the daughter of Herodias herself came in and danced, she pleased Herod and those sitting with him. The king said to the young lady, ""Ask me whatever you want, and I will give it to you."""
Nyúè aè m duèñshi máè buu ce aède' ñwáè aè m ba riñ ka', máè riñ vi. Máè sañ a suñ weèe mú mmo' efa gho.	how that by revelation the mystery was made known to me, as I wrote before in few words,
Pol aè du a ba' aè rla' Dábeè, a du aè rla' Listraè. Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisos moè' aè m ba aèfo, a too ye ená Timotïì. Yïì ma aè m ba ñwáè Jus ce e m ba ñwáè rbyemïì, yïì ta aè ba yi ñwáè Greês.	He came to Derbe and Lystra: and behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a Jewess who believed; but his father was a Greek.
Weèe ce weâe koèñ ená weèe ba njeptii mncir, waè' weèe ce yu' yuu ce mncir vi ce laèa a?	Tell me, you that desire to be under the law, don't you listen to the law?
Yïì ma aè laa neè ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, “Geèe neè yuu ce e ka' suñ weèe ená weèe geêe.”	"His mother said to the servants, ""Whatever he says to you, do it."""
Map mmir mi mú'ñgeèr, woweèe a riñ ye. A ka' rïìñ ye wa'a, e bú, woweèe a ker yá ye ka'.	Their eyes were opened, and they recognized him, and he vanished out of their sight.
E m fa buu neè ñwáè aèmboè ñger ñgaèñ yi m ba. E m fa moè' ncúèkïì taê, a fa moè' ncúèkïì baa, a fa moè' ncúèkïì moè'sir. E ka' fa, a du aè mbeè.	To one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one; to each according to his own ability. Then he went on his journey.
E lùusi sìi baa.	He has heat up cold fufu.
Láè neè mmir mbenduè buu ce Nyúè aè kaè' neè weèe, ce lu'shi. Táá neè tatap aè nfeè' ñgá', ce loo neè Nyúè, ke' ce sá ka'.	rejoicing in hope; enduring in troubles; continuing steadfastly in prayer;
ba Judaès muu Jáêms, ba Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ce e m loè a fyeni Jisoès naè.	Judas the son of James; and Judas Iscariot, who also became a traitor.
M be kuè ce yu' nyor, ka' sá' moè' yu njo ka' wa'a. M be ce yu' nyor seè'ni ce suñ beèe ba buu ce Tata Jisos Kraâis aè m suñ máè aè njáèá mlo mo' ker ba vïì ce e múè' ma mmir máè yáê.	It is doubtless not profitable for me to boast. For I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
Mmbañruè, koèñ neè wee bbyeèñge. Fa nyúè' neè woweèe ka'.	Husbands, love your wives, and don't be bitter against them.
E ka' loâ fúú efa rkwe, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a kuushïì yuu ce e m laèa anaè. A ka' kuushi, a byemi yuu ce Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa, a ker byemi yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa anaè.	When therefore he was raised from the dead, his disciples remembered that he said this, and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus had said.
Mluè mi be ba neè bbyeèñge ce a yu neè mmbúè, ba byeèñge ce a ce nyoñsi boo.	But woe to those who are with child and to those who nurse babies in those days!
E loèr beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, a lá'si nyor a woweèe, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yáê, seèe ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá buu wááwá ce ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m sañ aèmboè Muu Ñwáè naè, vi bo ghááte njo.	"He took the twelve aside, and said to them, ""Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the prophets concerning the Son of Man will be completed."
Woweèe a ka' yá njáèá ntee ce Pitaè ba Joân a m túr, a bááñger seê, njobeè' woweèe a m ku ba beâe aètáèr, a riñ ñwaè' ka'. Woweèe a m rïìñ aè nfeè' anaè ená Pitaè ba Joân a m ba a Jisoès weèe neè mini-ñwáè.	Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and had perceived that they were unlearned and ignorant men, they marveled. They recognized that they had been with Jesus.
Ñwáè aè ka' lá ntee ba aè yuu ce yïì nyor koèñ, baná e be kwe. Ñwáè aè ka' lá ntee ba aè yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi koèñ, baná e be koni ryoèñ, cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.	For the mind of the flesh is death, but the mind of the Spirit is life and peace;
E ka' baè' mbe Saimún Pitaè, e laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, a wáè ce aè be suè'si ma mkuèu a?”	"Then he came to Simon Peter. He said to him, ""Lord, do you wash my feet?"""
Mmbañruè wowo a bornïì efa rnoèñ a bbyeèñge weèe, a ce luèu aè rnoèñ ba a mmbañruè mo' weèe, a ce geèe buu ce vi yu neè rïìtu-ñwáè seê. Woweèe a ká' ñgá' mbe waâp nduè, aè ba ñgá' ce e ghááte aè yaèp buu bbebep anaè.	Likewise also the men, leaving the natural function of the woman, burned in their lust toward one another, men doing what is inappropriate with men, and receiving in themselves the due penalty of their error.
A ñwáè ce máè m ce laèa mánáê, ‘Ñwáè moè' ce vúè embe máâ njïì ce yi nta' yi caèa ya njobeè' a m bii ka' bi máè, e ku ba naè.’	This is he of whom I said, 'After me comes a man who is preferred before me, for he was before me.'
Jisoès aè laa neè beèe aè nfeè' anaè enáê, “Weèe aè vúè aè rkoo máè, a túr bsaè' ba mmbaèñ aèmboè m yu lá nyáèá wa'a njoká? Máè m ce vúè mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá ce cu aè nsheè ce yá'ni beèe, weèe aè ke' koo máè ka'.	"In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, ""Have you come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily in the temple teaching, and you didn't arrest me."
Bláá njáèá mnyaèa ca vi ka' ba túr ñger aè rgeèe mnyor beèe tá vi ba brara, yi ka' ba yi ká aèmboè bláá Jisos Kraâis ce vi túr ñger aè rgeèe viseèe mntee tá vi ba brara? E m loèr yïì nyor ce e m ba nrara a gee tañshïì aègho neè Nyúè a seâe btuè. E m geèe cena ba aè ñger Yú' Rara ce yi ku ba aègho aè nfeè' wááwá. Vi bláá vi túr ñger aè rgeèe tá seèe ba brara faè dïì' seèe bo geèe mfaâ' mcicïì ce aède' mi lo vúè neè rkwe ka'. E m geèe wa'a tá seèe bo faè' ba neè Nyúè ce e yu nteèe.	how much more will the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?
Ncïìndap Nyúè aè laa neè bbyeèñge anaè enáê, “Weèe fa wáp ka'. M rïìñ máná weèe ce roèo ba Jisoès ce a mú taa mbe kïìntaa naè.	"The angel answered the women, ""Don't be afraid, for I know that you seek Jesus, who has been crucified."
Pitaè aè natïì mbekïì a ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès ce ncoèp moè'sir-aè-rrúèú, a laa mbekïì neè ku' beèe anaè enáê, “Yaè beâe Judaè ker ba beèe wááwá ce a ce cu aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. Yu'shi neè boèñboñ tá m suñ weèe yuu ce yi yu.	"But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and spoke out to them, ""You men of Judea, and all you who dwell at Jerusalem, let this be known to you, and listen to my words."
Wɛ̌ kòŋ enɛ m̀ fa wɛ̀ kɛ?	What do you want me to give you?
Wɛ̀ kòŋ ba yòo mâ kɛ̀ yòo tâ?	Do you love your mother or your father?
Ca yi m geèe bcor wááwá vi misïì a tap aè rbyemïì, a ce kuè' aè beèe aè mnoèñ wááwá.	So the assemblies were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily.
Tá Tata Jisoès gee tá rkoèñnïì ce weèe túr a weâe mú naè, li du kuèntombïì, ker gee tá weèe koñ beèe wááwá aèmboè weèr aè koèñ weèe foñ naè.	and the Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we also do toward you,
Kwaè'shi ka aèmboè ñwáè mcañnïì, e ka' tá láè mncir ce a láè neè ñgaâa mcañnïì ka', e so ka'.	Also, if anyone competes in athletics, he isn't crowned unless he has competed by the rules.
Yuu ce yi koni beèe ca yi ce duèñshi ená mñgaèa ce a ke maè' enáê, “Ñgwe aè vú', a ker kúti aèmbuèu mo.” Ker ma' moè' enáê, “A suè'si ñkuânyaèm, e ka' raa wáá a ker biñri aè ncaè'” naè vi yu mini.	"But it has happened to them according to the true proverb, ""The dog turns to his own vomit again,"" and ""the sow that has washed to wallowing in the mire."""
M ce loo máná Nyúè túr ntee boèñboñ neè beèe wááwá ce a koèñ Tata Jisos Kraâis neè mini-ñwáè, a ku cu ba njep rkoèñnïì anaè.	Grace be with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with incorruptible love. Amen.
Mɛ̀ yɛ ye a mɛŋni.	I saw him and did not recognise him.
Weèe ka' gee wa'a beèe ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì ka' naè, a vúseè weèe, wee weèe ker ke' ená ñwáâ jáá be faè' tá weèe ka' ye ka'.	that you may walk properly toward those who are outside, and may have need of nothing.
M ce kwaè'shi máná weèe aè yu' yïì nsuñ, a yá'nïì weèe buu ce vi yu mini, aè ba buu ce vi kuèu ye.	if indeed you heard him, and were taught in him, even as truth is in Jesus:
A ká' Poêl, e ka' vúè, Táètuloè aè ká' a ce suñ govanoè buu ce Pol aè m geèe, a ce laèa neè ye enáê, “Wáè sa' weèr, weèr aè cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè seê. AÈ ka' ba njo' buu ce wáè geèe neè weèr, bdïì' wááwá efa yer ñgoèñ vi ba yáánïì.	"When he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, ""Seeing that by you we enjoy much peace, and that excellent measures are coming to this nation,"
M rïìñ neè mini-ñwáè ená yuu mo' yi yu ce aède' yi gapnïì seèe efa rkoèñnïì ce Nyúè koèñ seèe na ka'. Káè yu rkwe áè, káè yu rluèñ áè, káè yu bcïìndap Nyúè, káè yu mnyúâmkaè' áè, káè yu buu ce vi yu aègho seè'ni na áè, káè yu buu ce vi bii ka' ba áè, káè njáèá ñger ká áè,	For I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor things present, nor things to come, nor powers,
Njeŋwɛ̀ ca e ke bii bii à lî.	This woman dances by witchcraft.
Geewa'a, ñwáè wááwá aè koni ñger aè ndeèe ce Jisoès Kraâis aè fa.	But to each one of us was the grace given according to the measure of the gift of Christ.
Woweèe a ka' ce ye byee, e laa enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená moè' efa weèe be fyeèni máè.”	"As they were eating, he said, ""Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me."""
Bfúr waê, weèr ce koèñ ená weèe riñ yuu boèñboñ ce Nyúè aè m geèe bcor ce vi yu aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè vi geêe.	Moreover, brothers, we make known to you the grace of God which has been given in the assemblies of Macedonia;
Ŋwɛ̀ nshe a ŋwɛ̀ ce e ke fuŋ nyʉ̀.	The landlord is the person who proclaims god.
Be keè ba aè nfeè' ce viseèe mnyor vi kúti aè njáâá wa'a, tá yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “A so rkwe” naè, yi ghááte njo.	"But when this corruptible will have put on incorruption, and this mortal will have put on immortality, then what is written will happen: ""Death is swallowed up in victory."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, nfeè' ce Jus a m ce ye yap ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aè ká' a ce gháá.	Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was at hand.
Nyʉʉ zhi fʉʉse e ku koo wɛɛ.	the bees have all come out from the hive.
Ncir Musïìs yi byemi ená ñwáè ce aède' e gee faèa ba aè tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè leè' ce Nyúè a m ye, ce yi lor dïì' mncir naè, e m ce ba muu yïì aè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì. E m geèe ye e ba yáánïì nfeseè.	For the law appoints men as high priests who have weakness, but the word of the oath which came after the law appoints a Son forever who has been perfected.
Ke'ni neè ce loo, faè dïì' weèe gwe rmoèoshïì ka'. Ntee njep rbúè, bsáè nje nyoèr.”	"Watch and pray, that you don't enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."""
Nfeè' múcaèr tá buu wááwá mïî. Baná weèe cu neè bfee-ñwáè tá weèe bo rïìñ aè rloo boèñboñ.	But the end of all things is near. Therefore be of sound mind, self-controlled, and sober in prayer.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca mïìsi, ku' beèe anaè a bááñgeèr aè ryá'nïì ce e m yá'ni anaè seê,	It happened, when Jesus had finished saying these things, that the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,
E m geèe buu bghagha' aèfo goèr ka' njobeè' woweèe a m byemi neè ye ka'.	He didn't do many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
Ñwáè mbaèa ca aè laa enáê, ‘Yaè taê, baná m ce bu' mmbo neè wáè ená aè tuu Lasoèroès mbe ndaèp yaè taê,	"He said, 'I ask you therefore, father, that you would send him to my father's house;
Luke	Luêk	16	28	njobeè' bfúr wa a yu mbo beèe ntaê. Maè'shi tá e du báá woweèe faè dïì' woweèe foñ a vú mbe dïì' ñgá' na ka'.’	for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, so they won't also come into this place of torment.'
Luke	Luêk	16	29	Abraèham aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Woweèe a túr ñwaâ' Musïìs ba mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè, maè'shi tá woweèe a yu' yuu ce woweèe a ce laèa mbo.’	But Abraham said to him, 'They have Moses and the prophets. Let them listen to them.'"
Fa mɛ̀ mntuʼ brɛr btaar.	Give me three loaves of bread.
tá aè bo rïìñ ená buu ce a yá'ni wáè vi yu mini ghup.	that you might know the certainty concerning the things in which you were instructed.
Máè ker yá aèmboè Muu Njeèe aè naèa nlaèadoñ mo'. E ka' naèa, ñgoèñ yi ci'tïì seê, nyúè aè sii aèmboè cáâ' sii wa'a, ñwáá yi bañ aèmboè bláá wa'a.	I saw when he opened the sixth seal, and there was a great earthquake. The sun became black as sackcloth made of hair, and the whole moon became as blood.
Ñwáè nfaè' mnsuu ce e faè' tatap aè ba ba ñwáè entombïì aè rye efa buu ce e faè' aè mñkúè.	The farmers who labor must be the first to get a share of the crops.
Seèe ka' fyá' viseèe mnyor ka' ye bráâd ca, ker no enjep ndoñ ca, Nyúè sa' seèe aèmboè beèe ce a geèe yuu bebep ka'.	For if we discerned ourselves, we wouldn't be judged.
Mɛ̀ri à fɛŋti mdip mbe ntʉŋ.	Mary has filled the pot with water.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce koèñ ená weèr fár byee ñkaè' anaè ba fá tá aè bo ye?”	"They said to him, ""Where do you want us to prepare?"""
Yú' Kraâis ce yi m ba njep woweèe yi m suñ woweèe aèmboè ñgá' ce Kraâis be yá, tá beèe a ka' kuè'si ye. Woweèe a m gheèter aè rrïìñ nfeè' ce buu ca be koni, ker ba njáèá njïì ce vi be ba.	searching for who or what kind of time the Spirit of Christ, which was in them, pointed to, when he predicted the sufferings of Christ, and the glories that would follow them.
E fa mɛ̀ mbàa, a tee mɛ̀ efa shaŋ.	He gave me money and saved me from imprisonment.
njobeè' e ce duèñshi ená Nyúè aè byemi ená e be geèe buu wááwá ce e kaè'. Baná seèe ce laèa enáê, “Yi yu wa'a” ba njo' ye. Seâe laèa wa'a, ce ku'si ba Nyúè.	"For however many are the promises of God, in him is the ""Yes."" Therefore also through him is the ""Amen,"" to the glory of God through us."
E laa enáê, “AÈde' m riñ aè njáâá ká ce ñwáè moè' aè ka' tá naèshi neè máè ka'?” E m laèa neè Felep ená e ko' cu a ye mbe mutuè anaè.	"He said, ""How can I, unless someone explains it to me?"" He begged Philip to come up and sit with him."
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, weèr aè maè'shi yeèr buu wááwá a vú fa wáâ mbuèu.”	"Peter said, ""Look, we have left everything, and followed you."""
Rbyemïì li m geèe beèe Isráèl a tuu ma rdip ce a too ená rdip rbeer. A m tuu rli aèmboè a m ce jáèr lá ba mbe ñkúè wa'a. Beâe aè to' Ijïìp a ka' juèu a waâp mbuèu gheèter foñ ená a bo tuu, rdip anaè li kuñrïì woweèe a du aègho mbaè roè.	By faith, they passed through the Red Sea as on dry land. When the Egyptians tried to do so, they were swallowed up.
Yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè aèmboè buu ca yi yu mini. A m sañ enáê, “Wáâ njeñwáè ce wáè be bi muu ka', lu'shi. Wáè ce wáè be riñ aèmboè a ke luuti muu ka', waa mbekïì ce lu'shi, njobeè' boo njeñwáè ce nduu aè maè' ye, a be loè caèa boo njeñwáè ce e cu a nduu”	"For it is written, ""Rejoice, you barren who don't bear. Break forth and shout, you that don't travail. For more are the children of the desolate than of her who has a husband."""
Jisoès aè m ku laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a niñ mbe keñ, tuu neèñguu roè entombïì, tá e laasi beèe anaè.	Immediately he made his disciples get into the boat, and to go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself sent the multitude away.
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Buu aè bi aè mñkúè goèr, ñgaâa rkep a ba múcaèr. Baná weèe loo neè Taèr ce e túr ñkúè ená e tuusi ñgaâa mfaè' tá a du kep yïì buu efa mñkúè.	"Then he said to them, ""The harvest is indeed plentiful, but the laborers are few. Pray therefore to the Lord of the harvest, that he may send out laborers into his harvest."
Ca yi m koni wa'a, tá yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa njïì enjep yïì ñwáè ncep ntuu yi bo ghááte njo.	All this was done, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through the prophet, saying,
Wèe à yɛ nè mee mmir a?	Did you see it yourselves?
Pol ba Silaès a ka' fúú embe shañ a du mbe ndaèp mbe Lidïìyaè, a tarte a bfúr weèe, a fa woweèe ñger. A ka' misïì, a duê.	They went out of the prison, and entered into Lydia's house. When they had seen the brothers, they encouraged them, and departed.
M ce kwaè'shi aè rvúè yá wáè, laèa neè ya cuèu.	but I hope to see you soon, and we will speak face to face. Peace be to you. The friends greet you. Greet the friends by name.
Jisoès aè ka' yá ye, a ká' ye a laa neè ye enáê, “Njeñwáè, wáè luèñ efa yo yañ.”	"When Jesus saw her, he called her, and said to her, ""Woman, you are freed from your infirmity."""
Krǎis [kɾáís] n 1a.	Christ Jesus.
Muu ca aè duê, a bipshi neè yïì ma enáê, “M be bipshi ba ká?” Yïì ma aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Tu Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe.”	"She went out, and said to her mother, ""What shall I ask?"" She said, ""The head of John the Baptizer."""
Woweèe a warseè seê, a baa ye nje nyoèr neè ntee-ñwáè.	They all wept a lot, and fell on Paul's neck and kissed him,
Woweèe a ka' beè', a lu'shi aè njáèá ñger ce ñwaè' anaè yi fa woweèe.	When they had read it, they rejoiced over the encouragement.
Cañ neè bsaèkïì. Yuu bebep mo' ce ñwáè e ke geèe e ke túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè yïì nyor ka'. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè ñwáè ce e ce saèki, e ce bepsi ba yïì nyor.	"Flee sexual immorality! ""Every sin that a man does is outside the body,"" but he who commits sexual immorality sins against his own body."
Woweèe a ka' ce ye byee, Máèári aè vú neè mgúr ce mi m boèñ seê, ce a m geèe neè njáèá mjáá ce a m ce too ená Naêd. Mgúr anaè mi m luèu ntaa seê. Mi m ba aèmboè nto'nïì litaè wa'a. E m loèr mgúr anaè a cu'ni aè mkuèu Jisoès, a siñsi neè yi nyúè'tu. Ndap aè m ku rúú nsïìp nsïìp neè mgúr anaè.	Mary, therefore, took a pound of ointment of pure nard, very precious, and anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair. The house was filled with the fragrance of the ointment.
Nsuñ kuu yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe na aè du aè bdïì' wááwá aè ñgoèñ anaè.	The report of this went out into all that land.
Woowèe a tòo fòo banɛ wèr be dù koo mbàp.	They have burnt the bush, so we will go and catch rats.
A ker sañ mbo enáê, “Tata Nyúè rïìñ ená mkwaè'shïì beèe ce a túr bfee mi yu aè cicïì.”	"And again, ""The Lord knows the reasoning of the wise, that it is worthless."""
tá Nyúè ka' byemi, m bo vúè yá weèe neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè, tá m bo lúèshi, tá seèe yu' rboèñ.	that I may come to you in joy through the will of God, and together with you, find rest.
Ñgaâa keè'ni Ndap Nyúè a beesïì a laa enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m be laa yuu neè ñger-ñwáè aèmboè ñwáè ca aè laèa na ka'.”	"The officers answered, ""No man ever spoke like this man!"""
Fa mɛ̀ bɛbɛʼ brɛ̌r tɛ m̀ zhe.	Give me a piece of bread so that I eat.
Njeñwáè moè' ce e m cu mbe kuèu aè bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, aè vú njïì embe yeâ njïì, a joo mcúèñcúñ cáè' ese ye.	Behold, a woman who had an issue of blood for twelve years came behind him, and touched the fringe of his garment;
Tar muu ba ma muu a m yu' buu ce Simïìyoèn aè m laèa a kuu muu anaè, a bááñger seê.	Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things which were spoken concerning him,
Bfúr waê, weèr ce laèa neè weèe aèlúèsimbuèu ená weèe loo neè weèr. Loo neè ená blaèa aèmboè Tata vi du aè ñgoèñ cárcár tá beèe a byemi ce yu'ni neè Nyúè aèmboè weèe aè m byemi a ce yu'ni naè.	Finally, brothers, pray for us, that the word of the Lord may spread rapidly and be glorified, even as also with you;
Woowèe a ba ce rì bkòr tɛ e kaʼ gher ye à ndoŋ.	They were fighting before he gripped him by the neck.
Ánoèk ce yïì ñgúè beèe aè m ba mbenjïì mñgúè beâe ntuunfu ká' embe ñgúè yïì Adaèm, aè m laèa yuu a kuu njáèá beèe ca. E m laèa enáê, “Tata be vúè a vi bcïìndap aè mncúèkïì aè mncúèkïì,	"About these also Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, ""Behold, the Lord came with ten thousands of his holy ones,"
Jisoès ba yi ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' naèti ce duè, e du a ba' aè rla' mo', njeñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Maataè aè konïì ye, a niñ a ye mbe ndaèp.	It happened as they went on their way, he entered into a certain village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
Jisoès aè ka' vúè baè' a yá aèmboè ñwáè anaè noèñ. E m rïìñ ená ñwáè anaè aè m yañ nfeè' njïìsaèp seê. E laa neè ye enáê, “Wáâ koèñ aè rluèñ efa yo yañ ca a?”	"When Jesus saw him lying there, and knew that he had been sick for a long time, he asked him, ""Do you want to be made well?"""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè du suñ kwáèá anaè ená m be fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enje beèe, geèe tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se ntïìni na ker ba aèyaèñseè, túè' moè' e keèr raa, tá m misi la rfaè'.	"He said to them, ""Go and tell that fox, 'Behold, I cast out demons and perform cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I complete my mission."
Má máè yu ñwáè ce m ce faè' njeptii beèe ce yap nta' yi caèa ya, a túr bsoogáè ce a yu njep máâ tïìi. M ka' laa neè moè' ená ‘Duê’, baná e be duè. M ka' laa neè moè' ená ‘Vúè’, baná e be vúè. M ka' laa neè yaè ñwáè rfaè' ená, ‘Geèe ca’, baná e be geèe yuu anaè.”	"For I also am a man placed under authority, having under myself soldiers. I tell this one, 'Go!' and he goes; and to another, 'Come!' and he comes; and to my servant, 'Do this,' and he does it."""
Ñwáè moè' ker ba ce aède' e gee beèe a luñ ka', njobeè' Nyúè aè ker fa ñwáè moè' njep ñgoèñ na ce aède' seèe luñ aè li rlii ka'.”	"There is salvation in none other, for neither is there any other name under heaven, that is given among men, by which we must be saved!"""
Woowèe a ròo à rsèesì e ce jɛ̀r kaʼ njobe ŋwɛ̀ wɛɛwɛ ku suŋ ba zhìi ŋkoʼbùu.	They want to arrange but it is not working because everyone is just talking about his grudges.
Bfúr waê, aè m ba mbe nfeè' ce máè m vúè yá weèe naè, aède' máè m ba laa neè weèe aèmboè beèe ce a túr Yú' Nyúè njep waâp mntee ka'. Máè m laèa neè weèe ba aèmboè máâ ke laèa neè beèe ce a ce yu' rboèñ aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na. Máè m laèa wa'a njobeè' weèe aè m bii boo bká' aè buu Jisos Kraêis, weèe aè m ba aèmboè boo ce a bii nyoñ mmbee wa'a.	Brothers, I couldn't speak to you as to spiritual, but as to fleshly, as to babies in Christ.
Máè ka' keèr fyá' a yá Muu Njeèe aèmboè e táá mbe rtuèu Sayoèn. E m táá mbo a beèe ncúèkïì rjeèe neè ncúèkïì ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mñkyeèe. A m sañ li rlii ba rlii yïì ta nje mnsaèpsi beèe ca wááwá.	I saw, and behold, the Lamb standing on Mount Zion, and with him a number, one hundred forty-four thousand, having his name, and the name of his Father, written on their foreheads.
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ gee fàa, à nashì ye.	If a person makes a mistake, you correct him.
E m fúr ñwáè ce woweèe a m ce koèñ ená e fúr embe shañ, aè ba ñwáè ce e m duè shañ njobeè' e m barsi beèe ená a tee tu neè ñkwe Ruêm, a ker yú ñwáè foñ naè. E ka' fúr, a fa Jisoès ená a gee yuu ce woweèe a m koèñ naè neè ye.	He released him who had been thrown into prison for insurrection and murder, for whom they asked, but he delivered Jesus up to their will.
Ŋkàʼ zhi be fʉʉ ba ànjɛ̌ɛkɛ?	How is the feast going to be?
Pitaè aè ker kani, a kaêa, a laa enáê, “Máè rïìñ ñwáè anaè ka'.”	"Again he denied it with an oath, ""I don't know the man."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' moè' weèe aè ba aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger wa'a, njobeè' weèe aè m geèe faèa ba buu bbebep.	You were made alive when you were dead in transgressions and sins,
A ka' teni mnsa' wáá, a lor rkwe ba ñgoèñ embaè yir a ma' njep ma mor caè. Ma mor anaè yu rkwe embenjïì.	Death and Hades were thrown into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
M ce loo máná Nyúè koosimnse neè weèe, fa weèe cumúnyañ seê, ker koñ weèe seê.	Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.
Wee weèe foñ yu aèmboè bluâr bteèe wa'a. Baná weèe ko'shi a yeâ geñ tá e bo loèr weèe baè'ri Ndap Nyúè yïû aè yú' aègho, tá weèe bo faè' mbo aèmboè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a yu brara, a ce tañshi btañshïì ce aè yú', ce vi yu byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' yuu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe.	You also, as living stones, are built up as a spiritual house, to be a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, káè aè feè'shi ba máè áè, káè aè feè'shi ba beèe mo' ce a yu ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisoès foñ áè, weèr wááwá ku ce feè'shi ba yuu yi mo'sir kuu Jisos Kraêis, aè ba yuu ce weèe aè byemi foñ.	Whether then it is I or they, so we preach, and so you believed.
Mjanjaʼ mkùu mi ke tap sê.	Tiny legs are usually very strong.
a gee rtaa kúú neè bsoèpsïì a sop ye mbe tuè, a lor mbaèñ a fa neè ye mbaè bo maè'. A ka' geèe wa'a, a gú'shi njep yeâ tïìi, a vúshi ye, a ká' a ce buèu ye aèmboè ñkúú wa'a, a ce laèa enáê, “Nyaèr, ñkwe Juês.”	"They braided a crown of thorns and put it on his head, and a reed in his right hand; and they kneeled down before him, and mocked him, saying, ""Hail, King of the Jews!"""
Nïìkoèdámoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈde' buu ca vi ba wa'a aè njáâá ká?”	"Nicodemus answered him, ""How can these things be?"""
“Wáè ka' ba Kraâis anaè, aè suñ weèr.” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “M ka' suñ weèe, weèe byemïì ka'.	"If you are the Christ, tell us. But he said to them, ""If I tell you, you won't believe,"
faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo laèa ená máè m baèptir ye a máâ rlii ka'.	so that no one should say that I had baptized you into my own name.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè Tata Jisoès ce seèe ce laèa aèmboè ye na, e m ba yi ba raèraâ jáá. Ñwáè ce e yu raèraè anaè aè m be fa' aè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì ka'.	For he of whom these things are said belongs to another tribe, from which no one has officiated at the altar.
Yi yu foñ ená ma beè'teè yi yu mbe seâe tar, tá ñwáè ce e koèñ aè rtuu yá weèe njo naè bo túr njïì ka', tá ñwáè ce e koèñ aè rtuu yá weèr mbena bo túr njïì foñ ka'.’	Besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf fixed, that those who want to pass from here to you are not able, and that none may cross over from there to us.'
Njáèá buu aèmboè bsaèkïì ba mká'ni, ba ñgeâe ñgwe, ba mbaèñ mmir aè buu yi fa keèr yu'ti a weâe mú ka', njobeè' weèe yu beèe Nyúè.	But sexual immorality, and all uncleanness, or covetousness, let it not even be mentioned among you, as becomes saints;
Nduunjì ca zhi gooŋger àmbò zhǐ kù Yàa waʼa.	This road is winding like that of Ndu.
Ŋgwe cu a mɛ̌ geŋ.	The dog is sitting by me.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè mla' Sodoèm ba Goèmoraè, mnsa' Nyúè mi m koo woweèe. Nyúè aè m toèo mla' anaè neè mor mi sheê, a kúti aè bú. E m geèe cena wa'a, a ce duèñshi ená a yuu ce yi be keè koni beèe ce a m teèe tu neè Nyúè.	and turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them to destruction, having made them an example to those who would live ungodly;
Àbee yu ŋger.	Togetherness is strength.
“M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' yu' ya nlaèa, byemi neè ñwáè ce e m tuu máè, baná ñgaèñ be koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè. A be sa' ñwáè anaè ka' njobeè' rkwe li keèr túr ñger mbe yeâ nduè ka'. Ñgaèñ be cu nteèe.	"Most certainly I tell you, he who hears my word, and believes him who sent me, has eternal life, and doesn't come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life.
John	Joân	5	25	M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená nfeè' ce gháá, e gháá war, ce beèe ce a kweñger a be yu' njeèndoñ Muu Nyúè. Beèe ce a be yu' njeèndoñ anaè a be cu bteèe.	Most certainly, I tell you, the hour comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the Son of God's voice; and those who hear will live.
John	Joân	5	26	AÈmboè ryoèñ li ke loè ese Taèr, Taèr aè geèe ryoèñ anaè li ce loè ese Muu yïì foñ,	For as the Father has life in himself, even so he gave to the Son also to have life in himself.
John	Joân	5	27	a ker fa ñger neè Muu yïì foñ ená e sa' mnsa' njobeè' e yu Muu Ñwáè.	He also gave him authority to execute judgment, because he is a son of man.
John	Joân	5	28	Weèe fa báèáñger njo' buu ce m ce suñ weèe na ka'. Nfeè' ce gháá ce beèe ce a yu njep nsheè a be yu' yïì njeèndoñ,	Don't marvel at this, for the hour comes, in which all that are in the tombs will hear his voice,
John	Joân	5	29	fúú efa rkwe. Beèe ce a m ce geèe buu bboèñboñ a be fúú, koni ryoèñ. Beèe ce a m ce geèe buu bbebep a be fúú tá Nyúè sa' woweèe fa woweèe ñgá'.”	and will come out; those who have done good, to the resurrection of life; and those who have done evil, to the resurrection of judgment.
John	Joân	5	30	Jisoès aè ker laa enáê, “AÈde' m gee yuu mo' neè ya tu ka'. M ku ce sa' beèe ba aèmboè a m suñ máè ená m sa'. M ce sa' wa'a, ce teni mnsa' yáánïì njobeè' m ce geèe ba aèmboè m ce koèñ ka', m ce geèe ba aèmboè yaè Ta ce e m tuu máè ce koèñ ená m geêe.	I can of myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge, and my judgment is righteous; because I don't seek my own will, but the will of my Father who sent me.
John	Joân	5	31	“Yi ka' ba ená ce suñ máè aèmboè yaè nyor, yi ba yáánïì ka'.	If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid."
A m vúè neè muu anaè a fa neè ye. Yú' caè yi ka' yá Jisoès, a geêe, muu anaè aè gwe kaè', a ce biñri a ce fúr bdúdú' aè cuèu.	They brought him to him, and when he saw him, immediately the spirit convulsed him, and he fell on the ground, wallowing and foaming at the mouth.
AÈ ka' keèr ba aè nfeè' moè', Jisoès aè ká' a ce yá'ni beèe aèwaâa roè. Ku' beèe aèñgoo se a vú a sir ye a tarte, e niñ mbe keñ a cu mbo. Beèe anaè a tááteè nje waâa roè.	Again he began to teach by the seaside. A great multitude was gathered to him, so that he entered into a boat in the sea, and sat down. All the multitude were on the land by the sea.
Yi ba enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' ce naèa tu, e naa ba aè yuu ce Tata aè geèe.”	"But ""he who boasts, let him boast in the Lord."""
Beèe wááwá a ku riñ ená mbañruèñwáè ka' ko'si tu, baná e coosi yi tu.	Doesn't even nature itself teach you that if a man has long hair, it is a dishonor to him?
Blúr caê, mboè ñwáè ce e geèe yuu embe nduè, ku ba ñwáè ce e geèe yuu anaè enjep mú foñ a?	You foolish ones, didn't he who made the outside make the inside also?
Ka' ba ená yuu bebep ce woweèe a m geèe naè aè m kúti ba bghoènïì neè ñgoèñ, rgweè ce woweèe a m gweè naè aè kútïì ba bghoènïì neè beèe enje jáá, baná bghoènïì ce seèe be keè koni aè nfeè' ce Jus wááwá a yu'ni neè Nyúè foñ naè, vi be keè ba magoèr aèmboè ká?	Now if their fall is the riches of the world, and their loss the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fullness?
Ŋgwe zhii zhi ke waa sê.	His dogs bark too much.
Fyá' neè wee mnyor yá ka ená weèe ce cu ba rcu ñgaâa rbyemïì a ba cu lá? Moèoshi neè weêe mnyor. Mboè weèe aè rïìñ weená Jisos Kraâis yu njep weèe, ce weèe ka' tá gweè rmoèoshïì ka' a?	Test your own selves, whether you are in the faith. Test your own selves. Or don't you know as to your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you?--unless indeed you are disqualified.
Ñwáè aè ka' koni bghoènïì ese Nyúè njo' mncir ce e ce láè, yi ba ba ená Nyúè ce fa seèe bghoènïì anaè njo' leè' ce e m ye ka'. Geewa'a, seèe rïìñ seená Nyúè aè m ghoèni Abraèham njobeè' e m kaè' ená e be ghoèni ye.	For if the inheritance is of the law, it is no more of promise; but God has granted it to Abraham by promise.
Nyúè aè m boo mbañruèñwáè a fa neè njeñwáè ka', e m boo ba njeñwáè a fa neè mbañruèñwáè.	for neither was man created for the woman, but woman for the man.
Yuu ce m ce laèa neè beèe ce a duè bguèu wáá yi yu ená njeñwáè fa fúú ese nduu yïì ka'. Máè laèa cena neè weèe ba neè ya tu ka'. Blaèa ca yu blaèa ce vi vúè ba ese Tataê.	But to the married I command--not I, but the Lord--that the wife not leave her husband
Woweèe a yu' rboèñ, a ka'ni ená a be fa ye mbaèa.	They were glad, and agreed to give him money.
Mdip anaè mi yu aèmboè baèptir ce e ce geèe weèe ce luèñ seè'ni na. Baèptir anaè yu ba ená ñwáè ce suè'si mghaa efa nyoèr ka', yu ba ená ñwáè ce geèe mkaè'ni neè Nyúè neè ntee rara. E ce geèe weèe ce luèñ embenjïì rfúú ce Jisos Kraâis aè m fúú efa rkwe.	This is a symbol of baptism, which now saves you--not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
A ka' seèesi ená weèr Pol weèe be niñ mbe keñ ñgoèr duè aè to' Italeè, a lor Pol ba ñgaâa shañ mo' a fa neè tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe efa bkúr bsoogáè ñkwe Ruêm. A m ce too ñwáè ca ená Julïìyoès.	When it was determined that we should sail for Italy, they delivered Paul and certain other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the Augustan band.
Boêo, yu'ni neè neè weêe bta ba weêe mma aè buu wááwá, njobeè' weèe ka' ce geèe wa'a, Tata yu' rboèñ.	Children, obey your parents in all things, for this pleases the Lord.
Seèe be ka' laèa seeká seè'ni aè? Waè' seèe yu jáá efa beèe moè' a? Yi yu wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Máè laèa wáá ená buu bbebep túr ñger mbenduè beèe wááwá, káè yu Jus áè, káè yu beèe enje jáá áè.	What then? Are we better than they? No, in no way. For we previously warned both Jews and Greeks, that they are all under sin.
Cena yi ka' mïì, a fa máè ráèráñ ce a ke feè' buu aègho, a laa neè máè enáê, “Naèti duê, du fe' Ndap Nyúè, ker fe' dïì' ce a ke fa rfa mbo mbe Ndaèp Nyúè foñ. Beè' beèe ce a ce loo neè Nyúè mbe ndaèp anaè.	"A reed like a rod was given to me. Someone said, ""Rise, and measure God's temple, and the altar, and those who worship in it."
Ñgaâa mfaè' ba ñgaâa rkeè'ni Ndap Nyúè a m fyááshi mor a táá a ce yár njobeè' mbáp aè m ce fute seê. Pitaè ye ye aè m duè a táá a ce yár mor a woweèe.	Now the servants and the officers were standing there, having made a fire of coals, for it was cold. They were warming themselves. Peter was with them, standing and warming himself.
Wee beè' ñwaè' ca, weèe tuusïì neè cor ce aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè tá woweèe a bo beè' foñ. Wee weèe be' ñwaè' ce máè tuusi neè cor ce aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè naè foñ.	When this letter has been read among you, cause it to be read also in the assembly of the Laodiceans; and that you also read the letter from Laodicea.
Sá' efa rfa Nyúè yu jáá efa sá' efa yuu bebep ce ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe. Ñwáè moè'sir aè m geèe yuu bebep, Nyúè aè sa' beèe, woweèe a gwe mnsa'. Geewa'a, beèe magoèr a ku ce geèe buu bbebep, Nyúè aè ku fa beèe rfa aè cicïì, a gee woweèe a ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii.	The gift is not as through one who sinned: for the judgment came by one to condemnation, but the free gift came of many trespasses to justification.
Woweèe a ma'shïì yaèp ta ce Sábáèdi a yi ñgaâa mfaè' weèe mbe keñ, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	Immediately he called them, and they left their father, Zebedee, in the boat with the hired servants, and went after him.
Nyúè aè beesïì neè ye ená ká? E m beèesi enáê, “Máè bár yaè beèe ncúèkïì saèambaê, ce woweèe a loo neè Baal ka'.”	"But how does God answer him? ""I have reserved for myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the knee to Baal."""
Woweèe a natïì a kúti aè mlaè'.	So the disciples went away again to their own homes.
E m fyá' beèe ce a m cute a sir ye mbe mú naè, a laa enáê, “Yáê, a yaè ma ba bfúr wa na.	"Looking around at those who sat around him, he said, ""Behold, my mother and my brothers!"
Máè yá máná wee ke vúè aèbee, vú ba aè rye byee Tata Nyúè ka'.	When therefore you assemble yourselves together, it is not the Lord's supper that you eat.
Máè geèe ca aè rduèñshi weèe tá wee weèe foñ bo geèe aèmboè máè geèe na.	For I have given you an example, that you also should do as I have done to you.
Weèe rïìñ boèñboñ ená weèr aè m vúè tá weèr bo bu' cuèu koni yuu ese weèe ka'. Weèr aè m vúè tá weèr bo bo' beèe, koni bkuè' ka'. Nyúè rïìñ wa' foñ.	For neither were we at any time found using words of flattery, as you know, nor a cloak of covetousness (God is witness),
Rbipshì anà rli jepsi mɛ̀ sê.	That question has confused me too much.
Wèr à bɛ̀rsi nduunjì tɛ mmutù bvi bo ce caŋ njo bòŋboŋ.	We have widened the road so that vehicles can drive on freely.
Yu njo' ye ce ená weèe aè byemi neè Nyúè ce e m fúr ye efa rkwe, a ku'si ye. Yi ka' ba wa'a weèe aè ce byemi ba neè Nyúè, a lá mmir ba mbe yeâ nduè.	who through him are believers in God, who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory; so that your faith and hope might be in God.
Yuu ce yi ce duèñshi ená seèe rïìñ Nyúè yi yu ená seèe ce geèe yuu ce e laèa.	This is how we know that we know him: if we keep his commandments.
Muu Njeèe ca aè ka' naèa nlaèadoñ moè', máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ yuu teèe mo' aè laèa enáê, “Vúè!”	"When he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, ""Come and see!"""
A ka' maè' bïìr anaè, Maikáèl ba vi bcïìndap a so. A ker ma'shi ená nyaèa ca ba vi bcïìndap vi cu mbe buèu ka'.	They didn't prevail, neither was a place found for him any more in heaven.
A ŋgwe ce sò à ba yɛ nà na.	This is the dog, which we saw.
Ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' ma'shi vi mndap, káè bfúr vi, káè bjar vi, káè yïì taê, káè yïì maê, káè boo vi, káè yi ñgoèñ ce e túr áè, njo' máè, e be koni ku' buu seê, caèa aèmboè e m túr naè kaèñ rjeèe, keèr koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè foñ.	Everyone who has left houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my name's sake, will receive one hundred times, and will inherit eternal life.
Yú' anaè yi m geèe e riñ ená e be yá Kraâis yïì Tata Nyúè wáá, ka' kwe.	It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ.
Wèe à for njàp anà e foo kaʼ.	You have not kept enough oil in that soup.
a ce gheèter aè ryú ye. Nsuñ aè vú a ba' ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè ncúèkïì ená rla' Jáèrusaláèm wááwá li jep.	As they were trying to kill him, news came up to the commanding officer of the regiment that all Jerusalem was in an uproar.
AÈde' m gee buu wááwá, ce ñwáè ce e ke fa máè ñger aè ka' táá mbe máâ njïì.	I can do all things through Christ, who strengthens me.
Tata be keè suèu embe buèu, tá beèe a yu' ma njeèndoñ aèmboè e waa, tá ncïìndap Nyúâ ñgoèr waa foñ, tá rsoèñ Nyúè li laêa. Be keè ba aè nfeè' anaè tá beèe ce a m byemi neè Jisos Kraâis a ka' kweñger, a fúú efa rkwe wáá,	For the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with God's trumpet. The dead in Christ will rise first,
M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce wáè m bii nsuènsuè ñwáè, wáè m ce kur yoè ñkaènda ce duè faèdïì' ce wáè gwáá. Be ba aè nfeè' ce aè yu nleeñwáè tá aè naa mmbo, tá ñwáè jáá kur wáè, loèr wáè duè aègho faèdïì' ce aè koèñ aè rduè ka'.”	"Most certainly I tell you, when you were young, you dressed yourself, and walked where you wanted to. But when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will dress you, and carry you where you don't want to go."""
Byáèá ce a m taa a Jisoès weèe mbe bkïìntaa naè, a su' ye neè mcáp aè njáâá wa' foñ.	The robbers also who were crucified with him cast on him the same reproach.
Ka' máè m ce feè'shi ba neè bfee ñwáè ka' wa'a, weèr ce feè'shi blaèa bfee neè beèe ce a bi njep múè lap rbyemïì. Blaèa ca vi loè enjep ñgoèñ na káè ese beèe ce a ce sa' ñgoèñ ca ka'. Yap ñger yi be mïì.	We speak wisdom, however, among those who are full grown; yet a wisdom not of this world, nor of the rulers of this world, who are coming to nothing.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Nyúè e ke sañ, káâ' aè mú ñgaèptú' du ba' aè mbuèuñkuèr. Ñwáè aè ka' ce jáèr aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi ce raa, aède' ñgaèñ koteè aè yuu ka' njobeè' ñgoèñ yi ce raa, e ce yá buu.	"Jesus answered, ""Aren't there twelve hours of daylight? If a man walks in the day, he doesn't stumble, because he sees the light of this world."
Beèe mo' a m loâ Juèdiyaè a vú a ce yá'ni bfúr enáê, “A ka' tá geèe weèe búè aèmboè ncir Musïìs yi laèa ka', aède' weèe konïì rluèñ ka'.”	"Some men came down from Judea and taught the brothers, ""Unless you are circumcised after the custom of Moses, you can't be saved."""
Beèe ce a m ba mbo a m rïìñ mbuèu ce Jisoès aè m laèa neè ye wa' ka'.	Now no man at the table knew why he said this to him.
Beèe wááwá a ka' yá yuu ce yi m koni na, a ká' a ce de'ñger ená, e duè aè rnoèñ mbe ndaèp ñwáè ñgeèe buu bbebep.	"When they saw it, they all murmured, saying, ""He has gone in to lodge with a man who is a sinner."""
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ce a yu raèraâ Lávïì naè, ncir yi byemi ená woweèe a koo dïû' mo'sir efa bdïì' rúú efa buu jáá jáèá jáá ce beâe aè to' Isráèl a túr. Yuu ce seèe rïìñ yi yuu ená woweèe a ce koo buu ca ba ese bfúr wap, ka' woweèe wááwá a yu ñgúè Abraèham wa'a.	They indeed of the sons of Levi who receive the priest's office have a commandment to take tithes of the people according to the law, that is, of their brothers, though these have come out of the body of Abraham,
A ker sañ mbe dïì' mo' enáê, “Beèe enje jáá wááwá, yoèñshi neè Tata. Tá beâe aè bto' wááwá a ku'si ye.”	"Again, ""Praise the Lord, all you Gentiles! Let all the peoples praise him."""
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsi a laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, weèr ce koèñ werná aè duñshi ncoèo moè' tá weèr yá.”	"Then certain of the scribes and Pharisees answered, ""Teacher, we want to see a sign from you."""
Sataèn aè vúê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ka' ba Muu Nyúè, aè laa tá bluèr ca vi beeñger aè bráêd.”	"The tempter came and said to him, ""If you are the Son of God, command that these stones become bread."""
E ka' baè', a niñ mbe ndaèp mbe Saèkaèriyaè, a ca'ni ÁÈlisabáèt.	and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.
Nyúè rïìñ ená ya ntee yi ce luèu aè ryá weèe. Njáèá njïì ce m koèñ weèe, ku ba aèmboè Jisoès ye ye koèñ weèe naè.	For God is my witness, how I long after all of you in the tender mercies of Christ Jesus.
Beèe ce a woweèe a m ba naè a beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu Jisoès, ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce aè rla' Nasaráât aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.”	"The multitudes said, ""This is the prophet, Jesus, from Nazareth of Galilee."""
Nyàa à caŋ a niŋ kù mbʉ̀ʼ.	The animal has run into the cave.
Geewa'a, tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe yi m byemi ba yuu ce ñwáè ce e m ce doèo keñ ker ba ñwáè ce e m túr keñ anaè a m laèa.	But the centurion gave more heed to the master and to the owner of the ship than to those things which were spoken by Paul.
A ye a m rïìñni mnyor aèmboè nduu ba nje ka' caar e bi muu mbañruè anaè. E ka' bi, Josáèf aè fa rlii muu ená Jisoès.	and didn't know her sexually until she had brought forth her firstborn son. He named him Jesus.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a karsi nyor a ke' njeñwáè ca, a laa neè Saimúèn enáê, “Wáè yá njeñwáè ca a? Máè vúè mbe wáâ ndaèp, wáè fa máè mdip ená m su'si mkuèu aègho ka', geewa'a, njeñwáè ca aè suè'si ma mkuèu neè mñgoommir, a siñsi neè yi nyúè'tu.	"Turning to the woman, he said to Simon, ""Do you see this woman? I entered into your house, and you gave me no water for my feet, but she has wet my feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head."
Beèe mo' a natïì yap a du a yá beèe Farïìsi a suñ woweèe yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe anaè.	But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and told them the things which Jesus had done.
“Muu mbañruè moè' yu mbena, a túr bráâd yi taê, ba nca baa. AÈde' mú byee ca vi ba' aè yuu ka'.”	There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish, but what are these among so many?
Seèe aè rïìñ wa'a njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Máè ce wáè ená aè ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì aè nfeè' wááwá aèmboè Máèlkisidáèk aè m ba naè.”	"for it is testified, ""You are a priest forever, according to the order of Melchizedek."""
Ñwáè ce Yú' Nyúè yi yu njep yeâ ntee ka' e ke byemi buu ce vi loè ese Yú' Nyúè ka' njobeè' buu ca yu neè ye aèmboè blúr wa'a, aède' e riñ buu ca ka' njobeè' ku ba ba ñwáè ce Yú' Nyúè yi yu njep yïû ntee ce aède' e riñ vi.	Now the natural man doesn't receive the things of God's Spirit, for they are foolishness to him, and he can't know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
Beèe wááwá, ka' neè ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè'-ñwáè, a m yu' yuu ce Jisoès aè m laèa, a byemi ená Nyúè ce geèe yïì buu aè njïû yáánïì, a byemi ená Joân baptir woweèe.	When all the people and the tax collectors heard this, they declared God to be just, having been baptized with John's baptism.
Yuu moʼ mɛ̀ riŋ àmbò ye zhi yu enɛ e ke vʉ̀shi sê.	One thing I know about him is that he is very cheerful.
Wèe à kʉti nè yee kùu a?	Did you come back yourselves.
Yap njèe zhi zhe yàa kwâa.	Their sheep have eaten my corn.
Baná wee weèe ka' ke yá buu ca ce koni, weèe riñ weená nfeè' anaè yu aètútú seê.	Even so you also, when you see all these things, know that it is near, even at the doors.
M be fúr wáè embaè mmbo beèe Isráèl, ba embaè mmbo beèe enje jáá.	delivering you from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send you,
Ka' cu, ma fu' mo' yi ká' a ce caèa aè rdip anaè, mdip mi ce ko' mbekïì, a ce niñ mbe múè keñ, Jisoès aè ce buumi yi yu.	Behold, a violent storm came up on the sea, so much that the boat was covered with the waves, but he was asleep.
Nyúè aè m fa mncir tá beèe a bo geèe buu bbebep goèr. Ka' yi yu wa'a, faè dïì' ce beèe a m ce geèe buu bbebep goèr, rboâñntee Nyúè li m gha' buu bbebep anaè aèfo goèr seê.	The law came in besides, that the trespass might abound; but where sin abounded, grace abounded more exceedingly;
Boo vii a ke kwe njè sê.	His children usually suffer too much of hunger.
Nyor a ghàʼ mɛ̀.	My body has become scaly.
Nèŋkùr a mʉ ba ntaa enje Mbòr.	Yesterday was Mbot market-day.
Tata aè beesïì a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni, waè' ñwáè moè' yu fa weâe mú ce e ke buu efa rfyáèá yi naè' káè yi jaèaki' embe ñka' nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè du aègho aè roè aè rnosïì a?	"Therefore the Lord answered him, ""You hypocrites! Doesn't each one of you free his ox or his donkey from the stall on the Sabbath, and lead him away to water?"
Ñwáè aè ka' koèñ ená beèe a riñ ye, aède' ñgaèñ ce geèe buu aè bsúèti ka'. Wáè ka' ce geèe mfaè' ca, aè gee ba aèwañ tá beèe wááwá a bo yá.”	"For no one does anything in secret, and himself seeks to be known openly. If you do these things, reveal yourself to the world."""
Woowèe a sɛpsi mdip enjep kaŋ nè ghee.	They have dipped water from the pan with a bowl.
Pol aè ka' láè mi mmbo mbe waâp nduè, Yú' Rara yi suu mbe waâp nduè, woweèe a laa bli ce a m yá'ni ka', a cep ntuu Nyúè neè beèe.	When Paul had laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke with other languages and prophesied.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Tataê, fa weèr njáèá byee ca aè nfeè' sïìp.”	"They said therefore to him, ""Lord, always give us this bread."""
E ka' kuèushi keèñ enjep mbeè, muunje ce e m ce faè' mbe ndaèp anaè ce a m ce too ye ená Rudaè, a yu' a vú aè ryu'shi ená ce kuèu nda lá.	When Peter knocked at the door of the gate, a maid named Rhoda came to answer.
Seèe rïìñ buu aè bbábá', a ce cep ntuu Nyúè aè bbábá'.	For we know in part, and we prophesy in part;
M ce suñ weèe máná weèe be keèr yá máè ka', caar tá nfeè' gháá ce weèe be laèa enáê, ‘Nyúè ghoni ñwáè ce e vúè aè rlii Tata Nyúè.” ’	"For I tell you, you will not see me from now on, until you say, 'Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!'"""
Kupse, ma'shi wo bsaèrbuu, loo neè Tata ená káè e be foèosi wáè yuu ce aè ce kwaè'shi njep wáâ ntee naè áè.	Repent therefore of this, your wickedness, and ask God if perhaps the thought of your heart may be forgiven you.
Yaŋ zhi jar nè boo.	The children have been afflicted with diseases.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè Timotïì, weèe ku riñ yïì ndeèe. Weèe rïìñ ená e faè' weèr ye aèmboè muu e ke faè' a yïì ta naè, aè rgeèe ená Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ du kuèntombïì.	But you know the proof of him, that, as a child serves a father, so he served with me in furtherance of the Good News.
Bfúr waê, yuu mo' tatap ce m ker ce roèo suñ weèe yi yu ená wee ce suñ buu weèe fa kaèa ka'. Weèe fa kaèa ka' aè rlii Nyúè káè aè rlii nshe ka', káè aè rlii yuu mo' ka'. Kuè laèa neè enáê, “ÁÈno” ce weèe aè ka' byemi, laa enáê, “Kaka'” ce weèe aè ka' kani, tá yi mi wa'a, faè dïì' Nyúè bo keè sa' weèe ka'.	"But above all things, my brothers, don't swear, neither by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath; but let your ""yes"" be ""yes,"" and your ""no,"" ""no;"" so that you don't fall into hypocrisy."
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè njáèá yú' ca, aède' a fúr yi enjep ñwáè ka', ce a ka' tá geèe rloo, jïì mdip ka'.”	"But this kind doesn't go out except by prayer and fasting."""
A m feè'shi blaâa Tata neè ye ker ba neè beèe wááwá embe yeâ ndaèp.	They spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all who were in his house.
E luute a vʉ̌.	He has at last come.
Ñwáè moè' ka' kani aè rgeèe yuu ce weèr aè sañ neè weèe na, weèe fyá' ñgaèñ boèñboñ. Weèe fa túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe weèe ñwáè anaè weèe ka' tá e bo ghaèani.	If any man doesn't obey our word in this letter, note that man, that you have no company with him, to the end that he may be ashamed.
Njemor ce yi be fa woweèe ñgá' yi be mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Beèe ce a ce gú'shi neè nyaèa anaè ba vi blañ, a ker túr ncoèo rlii nyaèa anaè, a be yá mluè neètú' ba neèmootïì.”	The smoke of their torment goes up forever and ever. They have no rest day and night, those who worship the beast and his image, and whoever receives the mark of his name.
Woweèe a ka' duè baè' aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaèa embe Ndaèp Nyúè, a vúê, a yá Pitaè, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Yoè ñwáè ryá'nïì e ke laè' mbaèa embe Ndaèp Nyúè a?”	"When they had come to Capernaum, those who collected the didrachma coins came to Peter, and said, ""Doesn't your teacher pay the didrachma?"""
Fástoès aè beesïì neè woweèe ená Pol yu aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, beèe a ce keè'ni ye aèfo, baná e be cu ba mnoèñ múcaèr, kúti aè rla' anaè.	However Festus answered that Paul should be kept in custody at Caesarea, and that he himself was about to depart shortly.
Baná yuu ce Nyúè aè ka' tarshi, ñwáè moè' fa gaèpse ka'.”	"What therefore God has joined together, let no man separate."""
M ce loo máná Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, ba Tata Jisos Kraêis, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ, gee tá weèe cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè.	Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
e vúê, a fe'shi nsuñ cumúnyañ neè weèe ce weèe aè m ba aènjïìsaèp ker ba neè beèe ce a m ba aètútú.	He came and preached peace to you who were far off and to those who were near.
Weèe ce sa' ye ba aèmboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a ke sa'. M ce sa' ya yu ñwáè moè' ka'.	You judge according to the flesh. I judge no one.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Duè vú neè nduu woè.”	"Jesus said to her, ""Go, call your husband, and come here."""
Jisoès aè m loâ aèfo a du aè ñgoâñ Tayaè ba Sidoèn.	Jesus went out from there, and withdrew into the region of Tyre and Sidon.
Weèe ce weèe yu mmasaè, geèe neè ñgeâe boèñboñ foñ neè bkwaèa. Weèe fa ce wápsi woweèe ka'. Weèe aè ba kuushi ená weèe bkwaèa ca weèe wááwá túr Masaè moè'sir ce e ce cu mbe buèu. E ke so'niñgoèñ ka'.	You masters, do the same things to them, and give up threatening, knowing that he who is both their Master and yours is in heaven, and there is no partiality with him.
Woweèe a m ce laèa wa'a, a ce kwaè'shi ená Lasoèroès ce buumi aèmboè beèe a ke buumi naè. Geewa'a Jisoès aè m ce laèa ba ená Lasoèroès aè kwe kwe.	Now Jesus had spoken of his death, but they thought that he spoke of taking rest in sleep.
Woweèe a m duè ba', a yá Jisoès ba ñwáè ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m niñ njep ye aèñgoo naè aèmboè e cu, a yar bcáè' aè nyoèr. Vi bfee vi banïì kúti mbo. Woweèe a m wáp seê.	They came to Jesus, and saw him who had been possessed by demons sitting, clothed, and in his right mind, even him who had the legion; and they were afraid.
Rfaè' ce weèe ce geèe na li ce jaè' beèe Nyúè ce a buu yuu, a ker ce geèe beèe magoèr a ce yoèñshi Nyúè.	For this service of giving that you perform not only makes up for lack among the saints, but abounds also through many givings of thanks to God;
Ya yú' yi ce lu'shi neè Nyúè ce e geèe máè luêñ,	My spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior,
Káâ' aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ, buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe vi ce duèñshi beèe buu ce aède' woweèe a m ba riñ kuu ye ka' naè. Vi ce duèñshi boèñboñ seê, ená e túr ñger ce aède' yi ke mi ka', a ker ce duèñshi foñ ená e yu Nyúè. Baná njïì moè' yu aègho ce aède' woweèe a fúr yap tu ka'.	For the invisible things of him since the creation of the world are clearly seen, being perceived through the things that are made, even his everlasting power and divinity; that they may be without excuse.
E m ker ma' ñgaèa moè' enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m túr boo mmbañruè a baa.	"He said, ""A certain man had two sons."
Mɛ̀ ba fa ye mbàa, na e rìŋ mɛ̀ loo.	I would have given him money, only that he doesnʼt know me.
Wɛ̀ riŋ yuu ce koni mɛ̀ a?	Do you know what has happened to me?
A m ku ghar ye aè ñkúú. E ka' kúti a ká' ñgaâa mfaè' ce e m fa mbaèa neè woweèe naè, tá e bo yá ená woweèe a m di' gee ntaa neè mbaèa anaè a ye sá' aè mbaèa sá' lá.	"It happened when he had come back again, having received the kingdom, that he commanded these servants, to whom he had given the money, to be called to him, that he might know what they had gained by conducting business.
Luke	Luêk	19	16	Ñwáè entombïì aè vúê, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, máè geèe ntaa neè ncúèkïì ce wáè m fa neè máè naè, a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì rúêú.’	The first came before him, saying, 'Lord, your mina has made ten more minas.'
Luke	Luêk	19	17	E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Yaè ñwáè rfaè' ce mboèñmboñ, wáè geèe yáánïì. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' wáè fyá' aè yuu ce yi yu múcaèr boèñboñ seê, baná máè fa wáè ñger aè rsa' mla' rúêú.’	He said to him, 'Well done, you good servant! Because you were found faithful with very little, you shall have authority over ten cities.'"
Ñwáè anaè aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ba gee máè luñ efa ya yañ aè ba laa neè máè ená m lor la rwaèa ce duê.”	"He answered them, ""He who made me well, the same said to me, 'Take up your mat, and walk.'"""
Jisoès aè m ker ma' ñgaèa neè beèe mo' ce a m rïìñ yap ená woweèe a yu beâe byáánïì, a ce fyá' beèe mo' aè yuu ka' enáê,	He spoke also this parable to certain people who were convinced of their own righteousness, and who despised all others.
Ñgwañkúñwáè ce e ka' ce ye yi ba rboèñ enjep ñgoèñ na, baná ka' e yu nteèe wa'a, e kwe.	But she who gives herself to pleasure is dead while she lives.
Nyúè aè ka' fa ñwáè bfee ce aède' e fa' neè beèe, baná ñwáè anaè fa' neè beèe. Ñwáè aè ka' túr bfee aè ryá'nïì, ñgaèñ yá'nïì beèe.	or service, let us give ourselves to service; or he who teaches, to his teaching;
Baná ñwáè ka' ce laèa buu neè beèe aè njáèá li ce e m be yá'ni ka', ñgaèñ loo ená Yú' Nyúè yi fa ye bfee aè rbeèesi buu anaè aè li ce aède' beèe a yu'.	Therefore let him who speaks in another language pray that he may interpret.
E be kúti keèr cu weèe ye seè'ni ba aèmboè ñkwaèa ka', e gha' ñkwaèa seè'ni. E be cu weèe ye seè'ni ba aèmboè nfúr ce weèe ye koèñni. E yu yuu goèr neè máè seê. E ka' ba neè máè wa'a, yi ka' ba yi ká aèmboè wáè ce e yu yoè ñwáè rfaè' a ker ba nfúroè ce weèe ye yu beèe Tataê?	no longer as a slave, but more than a slave, a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much rather to you, both in the flesh and in the Lord.
Ñwáè ce e yu muu Nyúè e ke geèe yuu bebep ka' njobeè' Nyúè yu njep ye. AÈtaè e gee yuu bebep ka' njobeè' e yu muu Nyúè.	Whoever is born of God doesn't commit sin, because his seed remains in him; and he can't sin, because he is born of God.
Woweèe a m ce kar aèmbuèu Jisoès a ce jaè' ye aè nfeè' e m ba aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. Ku' bbyeèñge mo' foñ ce a m vúè a Jisoès weâe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m ba aèfo.	who, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and served him; and many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
E m ká' beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ce e m ce naè, a tuu woweèe a baa a baa, a fa woweèe ñger ená woweèe a ce fúr byú' bbebep enjep beèe.	He called to himself the twelve, and began to send them out two by two; and he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
A mbuèu ce máè láè ntee aè rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè weèe ce weèe yu aè rla' Rum foñ.	So, as much as is in me, I am eager to preach the Good News to you also who are in Rome.
Ŋwɛɛ zhi mʉ saŋ nè tʉʼ.	The moon shone in the night.
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' lor yïì nyor njep nsheè aèmboè muu ñká' ca, ñgaèñ yu ñwáâ ñgoèr se mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.	Whoever therefore humbles himself as this little child, the same is the greatest in the Kingdom of Heaven.
E m laèa neè woweèe ená a ku lor ba mbaèñ, a fa loèr byee, ba baèa ba mbaèa ka'.	He commanded them that they should take nothing for their journey, except a staff only: no bread, no wallet, no money in their purse,
AÈmboè seèe ce cu aè ñger Yú' Nyúè na, baná seèe ce gee buu aè ñger Yú' Nyúè.	If we live by the Spirit, let's also walk by the Spirit.
Brɛ̀rɛŋ byuur bvi car mbà ŋkaa ana sê.	There are so many dry bamboos down that bush.
Nyúè Abraèham ce e yu Nyúè Aisïìk a ba Nyúè Jakoèp a ker ba Nyúè viseèe btarkú wááwá, aè kuè'si Jisoès ce e yu yïì ñwáè rfaè'. Weèe aè m fa ye neè beèe ce a m ce sa' weèe, a máñni ye aè bsii Pailáèt, ka' Pailáèt aè m ce koèñ aè rmaè'shi ye wa'a.	The God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Servant Jesus, whom you delivered up, and denied in the presence of Pilate, when he had determined to release him.
Rshentee muu anà rli bep sê.	That childʼs anger is very bad.
njobeè' seèe rïìñ seená aèmboè Nyúè aè m fúr Kraâis efa rkwe naè, aède' e ker kwe ka'. Rkwe li ker túr ñger mbe yeâ nduè ka'.	knowing that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies no more. Death no more has dominion over him!
Weèr túr buu magoèr se aè rlaèa aèmboè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì ca, geewa'a weèr aè rïìñ aèmboè aède' weèr nashïì vi neè weèe ka' njobeè' weèr ka' nashi weèe yu' ka'.	About him we have many words to say, and hard to interpret, seeing you have become dull of hearing.
Wee bta a m ye manaè aè rïìñ a ku lo a kweñger.	Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died.
Nyúè ce geèe wa'a, tá mnsa' mi bo koo beèe ce a byemi yuu mini ka', a ce yu' yap rboèñ ba neè bsaèrbuu.	that they all might be judged who didn't believe the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
E m kwaè'shi ená e be geèe buu ca ce nfeè' aè ka' gháá, vúè neè buu embe buèu ba buu enjep nsheè wááwá tarshi aèbee, láè njeptii Jisos Kraêis.	to an administration of the fullness of the times, to sum up all things in Christ, the things in the heavens, and the things on the earth, in him;
(Ñwáè aè m be baa yïì nyor ka'. Ñwáè e loè nyañ yi tu, ker fyá' aè yïì nyor aèmboè Kraâis e ke geèe neè cor naè.	For no man ever hated his own flesh; but nourishes and cherishes it, even as the Lord also does the assembly;
A ka' vúè neè ye, e laa enáê, “Ñkúú Agripaè ker ba beèe wááwá ce weèr woweèe yu taâa, yá neè ñwáè ce Jus wááwá a m tuu beèe ená a vú yá máè, suñ buu ce e geèe. Woweèe a vú a yá máè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ker ba aèfa, a ce waani, a ce laèa ená e yu ñwáè ce e ba keèr cu nteèe ka'.	"Festus said, ""King Agrippa, and all men who are here present with us, you see this man, about whom all the multitude of the Jews petitioned me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer."
Weèe ka' cu weèe beèe ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì ka', weèe cu neè bfee-ñwá. Weèe fa maè'shi tá nfeè' ce weèe yu weèe woweèe anaè bú aè cicïì ka'.	Walk in wisdom toward those who are outside, redeeming the time.
Baná aè fa koosi rïìtu aè rsuñ beèe aèmboè yïìseèe Tata Jisoès, káè koosi rïìtu njo' máè ce m yu mbe shañ njo' ye ka'. Yá ñgá' njo' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aè ñger Nyúè.	Therefore don't be ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner; but endure hardship for the Good News according to the power of God,
Seèe be geèe seeká seè'ni? Waè' seèe be ce geèe buu bbebep njobeè' seèe ker bii njeptii mncir ka', a ba ba njeptii rboâñntee Nyúè a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr.	What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under law, but under grace? May it never be!
[Jisoès aè ka' fúú efa rkwe aè noèñ entombïì embe múè ñgaèa, a duñshi yïì nyor entombïì neè Máèári e aè rla' Makdalaè ce e m fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' saèamba enjep ye naè.	Now when he had risen early on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
Seèe rïìñ ená mncir Nyúè vi yu bboèñboñ ce ñwáè aè ka' gee rfaè' ce a ba geèe aègho.	But we know that the law is good, if a man uses it lawfully,
Pol aè laa enáê, “Weèe ce war a ce koosi máè bsáè wa'a njoká? Máè ku tami nyor ba ená a koo máè kur kur caè'caè' ka', máè tami nyor foñ aè rkwe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aètu Tata Jisoès.”	"Then Paul answered, ""What are you doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus."""
La rfaè' li yu ená m fa' neè coêr. Nyúè a ñwáè ce e fa rfaè' ca mba máâ mmboè tá m bo jaè' weèe. Yu ya dïì' ená m gee tá beèe a riñ Nsuñ Nyúè boèñboñ.	of which I was made a servant, according to the stewardship of God which was given me toward you, to fulfill the word of God,
Njeñwáè ye ye ka' ce geèe rloo, káè ce cep ntuu Nyúè áè, ke' señ rtaa mbe tuè ka' baná e coosi mbañruèñwáè ce e yu tu neè ye. Njeñwáè ka' tá señ rtaa mbe tuè ka' baná e yu aèmboè njeñwáè ce a kwaèa ye tu wa'a.	But every woman praying or prophesying with her head unveiled dishonors her head. For it is one and the same thing as if she were shaved.
Weèr ce suñ ñwáè wááwá aèmboè Jisoès ca. Weèr ce báá ñwáè wááwá, a ker ce loèr bfee ce Nyúè aè fa weèr a ce yá'ni beèe aèmboè Jisos Kraâis tá ñwáè wááwá ce e yu aèbee a Jisoès bo ba aèmboè Nyúè ce koèñ ená e ba ba.	whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus;
Ku' beèe ca wááwá a waa a laa enáê, “Yú ñwáè ca, fúr Baèrabaès embe shañ, fa neè weèr.”	"But they all cried out together, saying, ""Away with this man! Release to us Barabbas!""--"
ÁÈliyakïìm aè ba muu Málïìyaè, Málïìyaè aè ba muu Mánaè, Mánaè aè ba muu Maètataè, Maètataè aè ba muu Nataèn, Nataèn aè ba muu Dávïìd,	the son of Melea, the son of Menan, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
Bkar waê, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, weèe aè rïìñ buu ca war. Baná weèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka' a lo bo' weèe tá weèe lo kúti ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, gweè embe dïû' boèñboñ ce weèe yu na ka'.	You therefore, beloved, knowing these things beforehand, beware, lest being carried away with the error of the wicked, you fall from your own steadfastness.
Woweèe a rïìñ ená Nyúè ce laèa ená beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca a ghááte aè rkweñgeèr. Ka' woweèe a rïìñ wa'a, woweèe a ku ce geèe yap yu buu ca. Yuu ce yi bep seê, yi yu ená woweèe a ce laèa ená beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca a geèe yáánïì.	who, knowing the ordinance of God, that those who practice such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but also approve of those who practice them.
A ka' ye ñkaè' mïìsi, Jisoès ba yïì ma ba bfúr vi ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a natïì a du aè rla' Kaèpanuèm a cu aèfo aè mú mnoèñ mo'.	After this, he went down to Capernaum, he, and his mother, his brothers, and his disciples; and they stayed there a few days.
Weèe ce bsaèkïì, mboè weèe yi weená ñwáè ce e ka' koo ñkar a ñgoèñ, baná ñwáè anaè yu ñwáè bbaèa neè Nyúè a? Baná ñwáè ce e ka' koèñ aè rkoo ñkar a ñgoèñ baná e geèe yi tu aè ñwáè bbaèa neè Nyúè.	You adulterers and adulteresses, don't you know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.
Beèe Farïìsi mo' a laa enáê, “Weèe ce geèe yuu ce ncir yi kani ená a fa geèe nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè ka' njoká?”	"But some of the Pharisees said to them, ""Why do you do that which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath day?"""
A ka' laèa wa'a, a kanïì ye. Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “A ke yu'ni neè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè bdïì' bsïìp, geewa'a beèe efa yeâ laè' ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp a ke yu'ni neè ye ka'.”	"They were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, ""A prophet is not without honor, except in his own country, and in his own house."""
A ka' koo Pol tá a bo niñ aègho mbe barakïì, e laa neè ñwáè ce e m ba tu bsoogáè yïû goèr ca naè enáê, “AÈde' m laa yuu a?” E beesïì enáê, “Baná wáâ ke laèa li Greâk a?	"As Paul was about to be brought into the barracks, he asked the commanding officer, ""May I speak to you?"" He said, ""Do you know Greek?"
Kwaa à kʉ̀ʼʉ.	Weevils have eaten the corn.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bááñgeèr. E ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Boo waê, yi yu tatap se aè rniñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.	"The disciples were amazed at his words. But Jesus answered again, ""Children, how hard is it for those who trust in riches to enter into the Kingdom of God!"
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Yaè taê, fa máè njáèá mdip anaè tá m no, faè dïì' ntee mdip yi bo keèr luèu máè tá m ker ce vúè aè rtu' mdip aèfa ka'.”	"The woman said to him, ""Sir, give me this water, so that I don't get thirsty, neither come all the way here to draw."""
Wɛr à mʉ du nè mnsaʼ anà mbe kôr.	We took the matter to a law court.
Weèe yu beèe ce weèe ce cu ba aè rraa, a ker ba aèmboè beèe ce a ce jáèr ba neèmootïì. Seèe yu beèe ce seèe ce cu ba aè túè'nji ka'. Seèe túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè túè'nji ka'.	You are all children of light, and children of the day. We don't belong to the night, nor to darkness,
Baná weèr ce koosi bsáè aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Weèr rïìñ ená aèmboè weèr ce cu neè nyor ca njep ñgoèñ na, weèr yu njïìsaèp ese Tataê.	Therefore, we are always confident and know that while we are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord;
Muu ca yu cêŋgǔŋguʼ.	This child is retarded in walking.
E ka' ce duè, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Nyúè aè ka' byemi, m kútïì vú yá weèe.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a naètïû aè rla' Áfásoès a niñ mbe keñ a duê.	"but taking his leave of them, and saying, ""I must by all means keep this coming feast in Jerusalem, but I will return again to you if God wills,"" he set sail from Ephesus."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe yuu tatap, m yu cuâu ñka' njeèe.	"Jesus therefore said to them again, ""Most certainly, I tell you, I am the sheep's door."
M koèñ máná m ka' ba vú ba' yá weèe m ku caèa ce duè ka'. M ce kwaè'shi máná m ka' vúê, seèe cu nfeè' njïìsaèp, ce Tata Nyúè ka' fa ñger.	For I do not wish to see you now in passing, but I hope to stay a while with you, if the Lord permits.
Ŋgàa baa ca à ghese a du a?	Has this crazy man finally left?
M ̀ yu ŋwɛ̀ ryɛʼnì.	I am a teacher.
Tantoʼ à cɛ̀r ma mbùu ntaaŋguu cà nè njàa.	Tanto has cut-off that big stump with an axe.
Baná yi ka' ba mini ená soè yu aè ñwáè moè'sir, aè konïì ye aèmboè wáè ba koni máè.	If then you count me a partner, receive him as you would receive me.
Seèe rïìñ foñ ená Muu Nyúè aè vúè, a fa seèe bfee tá seèe bo rïìñ Nyúè ce mini. Seèe yu njep Nyúè ce mini anaè aèmboè seèe yu njep Muu yïû Jisos Kraêis. Yu ye ce e yu Nyúè ce mini, a ker ba ryoèñ ce nfeseè.	We know that the Son of God has come, and has given us an understanding, that we know him who is true, and we are in him who is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life.
ba Feleêp, ba Baètoèlomïì, ba Tomaês, ba Matïìyoè ce e m ba ñwáè ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', ba Jáêms, ce e m ba muu Alfïìyoès ba Taèdiyoès,	Philip; Bartholomew; Thomas; Matthew the tax collector; James the son of Alphaeus; Lebbaeus, whose surname was Thaddaeus;
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.	He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
M be tuu AÈtimaè ká Taèikokoès áè, tá e vú yá wáè. E ka' vú ba', aè vú cárcár seê, vú yá máè aè rla' Nïìkapolïìs njobeè' máè kwaè'shi ená m be cu aè rla' ca tá luèu yi she.	When I send Artemas to you, or Tychicus, be diligent to come to me to Nicopolis, for I have determined to winter there.
Ntee yi bep woweèe seê, njobeè' Pitaè ba Joân aè m ce yá'ni beèe ená Jisoès aè m fúú efa rkwe, yi ce duèñshi ená beèe ce a kweñger a be fúú efa rkwe.	being upset because they taught the people and proclaimed in Jesus the resurrection from the dead.
Seèe rïìñ seená buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè m geèe vi ce warñger, a ce yu' ryañ aèmboè njeñwáè ce e ce luuti muu wa'a, vú ba' ntïìni na.	For we know that the whole creation groans and travails in pain together until now.
Woweèe a ká' a ce bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e lo efa yap ñgoèñ duê.	They began to beg him to depart from their region.
Ñwáè ce e ce ye njáèá buu wááwá fa jaèasi ñwáè ce e kani efa rye njáèá byee mo' naè ka', ñwáè ce e ce ye njáèá byee mo' ka' naè fa laèa ená ñwáè ce e ye njáèá byee wááwá aè geèe yuu bebep ka', njobeè' Nyúè aè koo ñwáè anaè aè yïì ñwáè.	Don't let him who eats despise him who doesn't eat. Don't let him who doesn't eat judge him who eats, for God has accepted him.
Baná ñwáè ce e ce kwaè'shi ená e táá tatap, lor nfeè' faè dïì' e gwe ka'.	Therefore let him who thinks he stands be careful that he doesn't fall.
Fa kèe jòo mutù ca kaʼ.	Never touch this car.
Kuushi neè ená koè' e mo'sir yi ke bepsi ncwa'.	A little yeast grows through the whole lump.
Fyá' ka neè bsiñ. Vi ke byeè buu káè kep buu káè lá aè bcaèñ ka'. Ka' yi yu wa'a, yeè Ta embe buèu ku ce nyañ woweèe. Mboè yeè ntaa luèu seê, a caa yïì bsiñ a?	See the birds of the sky, that they don't sow, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns. Your heavenly Father feeds them. Aren't you of much more value than they?
Rúèú efa gho yi yu neè beèe ce a ce bú aèmboè rúèú ce aède' yi yú ñwáè, a ba neè beèe ce a be luèñ aèmboè yuu ce aède' yi gee ñwáè e cu nteèe. AÈmboè yi yu wa' na, baná ñwáè ce e ghááte aè rgeèe njáèá rfaè' ca yu nda?	to the one a stench from death to death; to the other a sweet aroma from life to life. Who is sufficient for these things?
Woweèe a maè' mini Nyúè, a lor ba mnde'. Woweèe a ce loo ba neè buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe, a ce faè' ba neè buu anaè, a ke' ce loo neè Nyúè ce e m geèe buu anaè ka'. Yu ye ce beèe a ba ce yoèñshi aè nfeè' wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	who exchanged the truth of God for a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever. Amen.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' m ce laèa buu ca ba aè ñger ya ka'. Yu ba yaè Ta ce e m tuu máè ce e m suñ máè yuu ce m laêa.	For I spoke not from myself, but the Father who sent me, he gave me a commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
Ñwáè embenjïì mo aè vúê, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, máè geèe ntaa neè ncúèkïì ce wáè m fa neè máè naè, a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì taê.’	"The second came, saying, 'Your mina, Lord, has made five minas.'
Luke	Luêk	19	19	E laa neè ye foñ enáê, ‘Máè fa wáè ñger aè rsa' mla' taê.’	So he said to him, 'And you are to be over five cities.'"
Jisoès aè ka' kuè fúú embe keñ, a yá ku' beèe aèwaâa roè, a koosimnse neè beèe anaè magoèr njobeè' woweèe a m ba aèmboè njeèe ce yi buu ñwáè rcïìñ wa'a. E ká' a ce yá'ni woweèe ku' buu.	Jesus came out, saw a great multitude, and he had compassion on them, because they were like sheep without a shepherd, and he began to teach them many things.
Woweèe a kútïì a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Weèr yi ka'.” Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná má máè foñ be suñ weèe ñwáè ce e m fa máè ñger aè rgeèe buu ca ka'.”	"They answered Jesus, ""We don't know."" Jesus said to them, ""Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things."""
a cu aèfo caar Hároèd aè ke kwe. Ca yi m ba wa'a tá yuu ce Tata Nyúè aè m laèa njïì enjep yïì ñwáè ncep ntuu enáê, “Máè m ká' muu waè e fúú e aè to' Ijïìp” naè yi bo ghááte njo.	"and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Lord through the prophet, saying, ""Out of Egypt I called my son."""
Loèr neè wee mnyor njep nsheè, ba múnyañ, kur ntee. Koo neè faèa ce bfúr a geèe, nje nyor, njo' weèe koèñni.	with all lowliness and humility, with patience, bearing with one another in love;
Beèe magoèr a be vúè a máâ rlii ce laèa enáê, a máè ye, bo' beèe magoèr tá a da'.	For many will come in my name, saying, 'I am he!' and will lead many astray.
Wèe à zhe kwâa nè ŋgʉ̀ ŋwɛ̀ ànjɛ̌ɛ kɛ?	How can you consume maize together with the seedlings.
Máè yu' máná beèe ce a m fa woweèe ncoèo nje nsaèpsi naè a m ba ncúèkïì- rjeèe-neè-ncúèkïì-ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-mñkyeèe. Beèe ca a m ba beèe efa mntáè' beèe Isráèl wááwá.	I heard the number of those who were sealed, one hundred forty-four thousand, sealed out of every tribe of the children of Israel:
Blaèa wááwá ce vi yu mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè, vi loè ese Nyúè, a túr sá' seê. Vi yu aè ryá'ni beèe, a ba aè rlapni beèe ce a ce yá'nïì ryá'nïì mnde', a ba aè rnaèshi beèe, a ker ba aè rcep beèe tá a bo cu rcu ryáánïì,	Every Scripture is God-breathed and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for instruction in righteousness,
AÈmboè Jonaè aè m cu njep rbúâ nca ce e m kuè' seê, aè mnoâñ btaar naè, Muu Ñwáè ye ye be cu njep múè nshe aè mnoâñ btaar.	For as Jonah was three days and three nights in the belly of the whale, so will the Son of Man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Nfeè' aè gháá ce a be kuè'si Muu Ñwáè.	"Jesus answered them, ""The time has come for the Son of Man to be glorified."
A ye ce e ce vúè embe máâ njïì. Yi nta' yi caèa ya. Máè ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' m co'ni vi blaba' ka'.”	"He is the one who comes after me, who is preferred before me, whose sandal strap I'm not worthy to loosen."""
Bli vi yu njep ñgoèñ na jáá jáèá jáá, li moè' aè ke' ba ce ñwáè buu efa ryu' ka'.	There are, it may be, so many kinds of sounds in the world, and none of them is without meaning.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe fa loèr ne ye aè ñwáè bbaèa ka'. Cep neè ye ba aèmboè nfúr weèe.	Don't count him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
M ce loo máná Tata Nyúè ke'ni lo ryoèñ, túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit. Grace be with you. Amen.
Máè yá muu njeèe aègee kaèbaèraè' ca. Buu bteèe caè ba beâe bgoèrgoèr caè a sir njeèe anaè a kaari a tarte. Njeèe anaè aè m ce yááti aèmboè yïì ce a sáá wa'a. E m túr mndoñ saèambaê, a túr mmir saèambaê. Mndoñ ba mmir ca mi táá aètu byú' Nyúè ce vi yu saèambaê, a tuusïì vi aè bdïì' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na naè.	I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, as though it had been slain, having seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God, sent out into all the earth.
Kìdàŋ ca zhi foo sê.	This bench is very shiny.
Ñwáè ce e m ce keè'ni shañ aè ka' lá' efa mmirloè yá ená bkeèñ shañ vi múè'ñger, e co' kaèafaè' ená e bo yú yïì nyor aègho njobeè' e m ce kwaè'shi ená ñgaâa shañ a fúúse embe shañ a cañ a duse.	The jailer, being roused out of sleep and seeing the prison doors open, drew his sword and was about to kill himself, supposing that the prisoners had escaped.
A be koo Nyúèrkaè' ce e m bo' beèe anaè naè, maè' njep ma mor ce mkaèñ mi m ce she njo. A dïì' ce nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè ba ñwáè ce e m ce nya' mnde' ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè naè a yu. Woweèe a be cu njo, yá mluè neètú' ba neèmootïì, kuè yá wa'a nfeseè.	The devil who deceived them was thrown into the lake of fire and sulfur, where the beast and the false prophet are also. They will be tormented day and night forever and ever.
Geewa'a, Nyúè aè m fa weèr ñger aèmboè e ke fa neè beèe ce a sáè. E m fa weèr ñger ca aè nfeè' ce Taitoès aè m vúè.	Nevertheless, he who comforts the lowly, God, comforted us by the coming of Titus;
Woweèe a fúú efa seâe mú njobeè' woweèe a m ba aè ñgúè' yïìseèe ka'. Woweèe a m ba ba aè ñgúè' yïìseèe, a m ba cu seèe woweèe. Woweèe a fúú efa seâe mú tá yi bo ba rara ená woweèe wááwá a m ba aè ñgúè' yïìseèe ka'.	They went out from us, but they didn't belong to us; for if they had belonged to us, they would have continued with us. But they left, that they might be revealed that none of them belong to us.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì na aè m bipshi buu neè Jisoès a kuu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, ker ba li ryá'nïì.	The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples, and about his teaching.
Ñwáè ce a loèr e ce jaè' yi jaè' naè e lo cañ njobeè' njeèe yu yi ka'; e túr yi yu nfeè' aègho ka'.	The hired hand flees because he is a hired hand, and doesn't care for the sheep.
Fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' lor wáè aètáèr njobeè' aè yu ghaèrñwáè ka'. Ba rduèñshïì neè beèe ce a byemi, aè wo blaèa, ba a yo ñgeèe, ba aè lo rkoèñnïì, ba a lo rbyemïì, ker ba aè lo rcu rrara.	Let no man despise your youth; but be an example to those who believe, in word, in your way of life, in love, in spirit, in faith, and in purity.
tá e bo teni mnsa' beèe wááwá. Beèe wááwá ce a ce yu'ni neè Nyúè ka', a ce geèe buu bbebep, a ce laèa buu aè njïû mbembep a kuu Nyúè, a be gweè mnsa' Nyúè.”	"to execute judgment on all, and to convict all the ungodly of all their works of ungodliness which they have done in an ungodly way, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him."""
Woweèe a laêa, beèe anaè a cuteè aè bkúr aè bkúr. Bkúr mo' beèe rjeèe rjeèe; bkúr mo' beèe mta mtaê.	They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and by fifties.
Baná seèe yoñshi Nyúè njobeè' seèe aè ka' ce duè ba fá, e ku táá kuèntombïì neè seèe. E táá wa'a, seèe ce jáèr aèmboè beèe ce a ce jáèr mbe ñgoo beèe Jisoès, Jisoès aè táá entombïì a ce vúni. Nyúè aè loèr seèe a gee nsuñ aèmboè Jisoès aè du aè bdïì' wááwá aèmboè nráèá ce a too e rúú boèñboñ seê, a du aè bdïì' wááwá.	Now thanks be to God, who always leads us in triumph in Christ, and reveals through us the sweet aroma of his knowledge in every place.
E geèe seèe aè ba beèe ce e ce sa' seèe aèmboè ñkúú, a ker gee seèe aè ba ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì neè Nyúè ce e yu yïì Taê. Tá foèo yi ba neè Jisoès, tá ñger yi ba neè ye foñ aè nfeè' sïìp. Yi yu wa'a.	and he made us to be a Kingdom, priests to his God and Father; to him be the glory and the dominion forever and ever. Amen.
Túè' aè ka' raa, weèr aè natïì a du a ba' aè rla' Sisaèriyaè, a niñ mbe ndaèp Felep ce e m ba ñwáè rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, a cu weèr woweèe. E m ba moè' efa beèe nsaèamba ce cor aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè m ce naè.	On the next day, we, who were Paul's companions, departed, and came to Caesarea. We entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, who was one of the seven, and stayed with him.
Mi mkuèu mi m ce laè'ñger aèmboè bco' ce ñgaâa ntoèo nlaèa a kupshi wa'a. Yïì njeèndoñ aè m ba aèmboè njeèndoñ rdip ce li ke gweè aè rkoñ wa'a.	His feet were like burnished brass, as if it had been refined in a furnace. His voice was like the voice of many waters.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè nfeè' anaè a ce too ená Simïìyoèn. E m ba ñwáè nyáánïì, a ce wáp Nyúè foñ, a cu a ce keè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be geèe tá beèe Isráèl a túr rfúteè. Yú' Rara yi m ba a ye.	Behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. This man was righteous and devout, looking for the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was on him.
Ñwáè moè' aè cañ a du a fúú kúèsha njep múè njáèá mruè' mo' ce mi m ce bañshi, a fapte aè ñke', a fa neè Jisoès ená e bo nyoñ. E ka' fa, a laa enáê, “Seèe yá ka ená waè' AÈlajaè be vúè suèusi ye embe kïìntaa na lá.”	"One ran, and filling a sponge full of vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave it to him to drink, saying, ""Let him be. Let's see whether Elijah comes to take him down."""
Ncir yïì embenjïì mo yi yu aèmboè yi foñ. Yi yu enáê, ‘Koèñ nfúroè aèmboè aè koèñ yoè nyor.’	A second likewise is this, 'You shall love your neighbor as yourself.'
Nyor yu mɛ̀ làrlàr.	I am feeling sick.
Ñgaâa cïìñ ñkuânyaèm ca a m cañ, a du a suñ beèe aè laè', a ker suñ neè beèe ce a m ba aè mñkúè, awá beèe a duseè aè ryá yuu ce yi m koni.	Those who fed them fled, and told it in the city and in the country. The people came to see what it was that had happened.
M ce suñ wee máná AÈlajaè aè vúè war, beèe a gee buu ce a m ce koèñ aè rgeèe neè ye, aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè.”	"But I tell you that Elijah has come, and they have also done to him whatever they wanted to, even as it is written about him."""
Ka' yi m ba wa'a, Nyúè aè m túr ntee boèñboñ neè máè, a ce máè tá yaè ma ka' keè bi máè.	But when it was the good pleasure of God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me through his grace,
Woweèe a lor ñwáè ce e m ba nfeèp naè, a woweèe a du a yá beèe Farïìsïî.	They brought him who had been blind to the Pharisees.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè beèe ce a ce jepsi weèe naè, maè'shi neè tá woweèe a soñ wap mnyor.	I wish that those who disturb you would cut themselves off.
Baná weèe gee rfaè' ca misïî. Weèe gee li neè ntee boèñboñ aèmboè weèe aè m káè' neè ntee boèñboñ foñ naè. Geèe neè li neè yuu ce weèe aè túr.	But now complete the doing also, that as there was the readiness to be willing, so there may be the completion also out of your ability.
Duè neè du gee tá beâe aè bto' wááwá a ba ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu. Baèptir neè woweèe aè rlii Taèr, ba Muu, ba Yú' Rara,	Go, and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
A mbuèu ce káâ' aè noèñ ce weèr aè m yu' buu ca, weèr aè be borni efa rloo neè weèe aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Weèr ce loo neè Nyúè ená e gee tá weèe koni bfee ce vi loè ese yi Yú', rïìñ buu ce yu vi wááwá, tá weèe bo rïìñ buu ce e koèñ boèñboñ.	For this cause, we also, since the day we heard this, don't cease praying and making requests for you, that you may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all spiritual wisdom and understanding,
Ñwáè rfaè' ca aè laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘Yaè masaè be fúr máè efa rfaè'. M be geèe má ká? M túr ñger aè rfaè' nsuu ka', rïìtu yi ce koo máè aè rloo buu. M be geèe má ká?	"The manager said within himself, 'What will I do, seeing that my lord is taking away the management position from me? I don't have strength to dig. I am ashamed to beg.
Luke	Luêk	16	4	M rïìñ yuu ce m be geèe tá beèe a bo koni máè a waâp mndaèp aè nfeè' a ka' fúr máè efa rfaè'.’	I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from management, they may receive me into their houses.'
Luke	Luêk	16	5	E ka' laèa neè yïì nyor wa' wáá, a ká' beèe wááwá ce a m túr mkaa a yïì masaè. E m ká' woweèe moè'sir moè'sir, a bipshi neè ñwáè entombïì enáê, ‘Weèe yaè masaè yu neè rkaa ba aè ká?’	Calling each one of his lord's debtors to him, he said to the first, 'How much do you owe to my lord?'
Luke	Luêk	16	6	E beesïì enáê, ‘Weèr ye yu neè rkaa aè bgaloèn mgúr mjeèe waami.’ E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Koè yo ñwaè' cu aè nsheè cárcár sañ mbo ba ená bgaloèn mjeèe kyeèe.’	He said, 'A hundred batos of oil.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and sit down quickly and write fifty.'
Luke	Luêk	16	7	E ká' ñwáè embenjïì a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Weèe yaè masaè foñ yu neè rkaa ba aè ká?’ E beesïì enáê, ‘Weèr ye yu neè rkaa aè ñkaèa msañ ncúèkïì.’ E laa neè ye enáê, ‘Koè yo ñwaè' sañ mbo ená mñkaèa mjeèe waami.’	Then he said to another, 'How much do you owe?' He said, 'A hundred cors of wheat.' He said to him, 'Take your bill, and write eighty.'
Luke	Luêk	16	8	Masaè ñwáè rfaè' ce e m ba ñwáâ mini ka' naè aè yoèñshi ye aè yuu ce e m geèe neè bfee-ñwáè naè. A mboè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a geèe buu neè yaèp beèe neè bfee-ñwáè wa'a, caa beèe ce a yu aè rraa.	His lord commended the dishonest manager because he had done wisely, for the children of this world are, in their own generation, wiser than the children of the light."
AÈ ker ce keè' ba ká seè'ni? Naèti mbekïì, ká' li rlii, tá a baptir wáè, suè'si yoè buu bebep.’	Now why do you wait? Arise, be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling on the name of the Lord.'
To máè m ku ba weèe seèe mbe Ndaèp Nyúè aè mnoèñ wááwá, weèe aè m be naa bo joo máè aègho ka'. Geewa'a, nfeè' ca yu yeè nfeè', nfeè' ce túè'nji be túr ñger.”	"When I was with you in the temple daily, you didn't stretch out your hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness."""
Yú' Nyúè yi ke fa beèe mo' bfee aè rfa beèe ncep mboèñmboñ, ker fa beèe mo' bfee aè rfeè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè njáèá njïì ce aède' beèe a riñ Nyúè boèñboñ. Yú' ca yi ku ba yi mo'sir.	For to one is given through the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge, according to the same Spirit;
Cena yi ka' mïì, Jisoès aè tuu neèñguu túâ Galeèle ce a too foñ ená Tïìbárïìyaès.	After these things, Jesus went away to the other side of the sea of Galilee, which is also called the Sea of Tiberias.
Ñwáè ce e ka' byemi ená Jisoès yu Muu Nyúè, baná Nyúè cu njep ye, ye ye aè cu njep Nyúè.	Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God remains in him, and he in God.
Joèsayaè aè m bi Jáèkonaèr ba bfúr vi aè nfeè' ce a m ce koo beèe Judaè aè rkoèñ ce du aègho aè to' Babiloèn naè.	Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers, at the time of the exile to Babylon.
AÈde' ñwáè saa cáâ' fi tar mbenduè cáâ' rúèú ka'. E ka' gee wa'a baná cáâ' fi caè yi be saèa yïû rúèú tá toto raa caèa yïì entombïì naè.	No one sews a piece of unshrunk cloth on an old garment, or else the patch shrinks and the new tears away from the old, and a worse hole is made.
Mluè mi ka' ce koo ye seê, e gee rloo neè yi ntee-ñwáè, mlïì' mi suu ye efa nyoèr aèmboè bláá wa'a, a cáácá aè nsheè.	Being in agony he prayed more earnestly. His sweat became like great drops of blood falling down on the ground.
Rbipshì anà rli tap sê.	That question is very difficult.
Woweèe a ka' ce suèu embe rtuèu, Jisoès aè ciisïì neè woweèe ená a fa suñ ñwáè yuu ce woweèe a yá naè ka', caar tá Muu Ñwáè ke fúú efa rkwe.	As they were coming down from the mountain, he commanded them that they should tell no one what things they had seen, until after the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
Yú' Rara yi m geèe Dávïìd aè laèa enáê, ‘Tata Nyúè aè m laèa neè Tata yaè enáê, “Cu aè la rkoo maè' caar tá m gee tá aè tár mo mkuèu mbenduè beèe ce a baèa wáè.” ’	"For David himself said in the Holy Spirit, 'The Lord said to my Lord, ""Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet.""'"
Rïìñ neè ená Tata be laè' ñwáè wááwá aè yuu boèñboñ ce e geèe, káè ñgaèñ yu ñkwaèa áè, káè e yu ñkwaèa ka' áè.	knowing that whatever good thing each one does, he will receive the same again from the Lord, whether he is bound or free.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Byemi neè Nyúè.	"Jesus answered them, ""Have faith in God."
Woweèe a m be nya' mnde' ka'. Yuu bebep mo' yi yu ce aède' ñwáè laa ená woweèe a geèe ka'.	In their mouth was found no lie, for they are blameless.
Woweèe a susi nyor ba neè mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ, ce yu mfaè' ce mi ghááte neè bbyeèñge ce a ce laèa ená woweèe a rïìñ Nyúè.	but (which becomes women professing godliness) with good works.
AÈmboè njeñwáè ca aè m kúti aè laè' naè, ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès ca a laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Rabaèi, ye yuu seè'ni.”	"In the meanwhile, the disciples urged him, saying, ""Rabbi, eat."""
Nyúè e ke geèe buu aè njïû yáánïì. E be maè' weèe ka'. E be leèse rfaè' ce weèe aè geèe, káè leèse njáèá rjaè' ce weèe aè m jaè' yïì beèe a ku bii jaè' naè ka'. Weèe aè m jaè' woweèe njobeè' weèe koèñ Nyúè.	For God is not unrighteous, so as to forget your work and the labor of love which you showed toward his name, in that you served the saints, and still do serve them.
Ñwáè wááwá aè m duè fa yeâ laè' aè rsañ li rlii aèfo.	All went to enroll themselves, everyone to his own city.
Ku' buu bbebep anaè aè kuè' a ba aèmboè rtuèu ce li saèp a ba' mbe buèu wa'a. Nyúè aè kuushïì buu bbebep anaè.	for her sins have reached to the sky, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Máè yá ma kaèbaèraâ' búú, a yá ñwáè ce e m cu mbo. Ñwáè ca aè ka' nyáá, nshe ba rbuu a da' a bú, a ker yááti ka'.	I saw a great white throne, and him who sat on it, from whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. There was found no place for them.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè be be' yuu ce Dávïìd aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce njeè aè m ce yañ ye ker ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba naè ka' a?	"But he said to them, ""Haven't you read what David did, when he was hungry, and those who were with him;"
Ñgwañkúñwáè ce e m ba ñwáè fuèp aè vú a fa mbaèa njo baa. Mbaèa baa ca yi yu aèmboè bfraâñ ta wa'a.	A poor widow came, and she cast in two small brass coins, which equal a quadrans coin.
Waè' yi yu boèñboñ ená ñwáè rbyemïì ka' túr mnsa' a ñwáè rbyemïì moè', e lor ye du aègho mbe kor ená beèe ce a yu byáánïì ka' a sa' a? Mboè weèe aè ba sa' wee mnsa' a weâe mú aèmboè beèe Nyúè a?	Dare any of you, having a matter against his neighbor, go to law before the unrighteous, and not before the saints?
M ce faè' ce duè kuèntombïì máná m bo duè koni blaè' embe buèu ce Nyúè aè ká' máè ená e bo fa máè njo' yuu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe.	I press on toward the goal for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
Weèe ka' kani, baná weèe aè ba rïìñ ená blaâa Nyúè vi ku ká' ba neè weèe káè mi neè weèe ka'.	What? Was it from you that the word of God went out? Or did it come to you alone?
Fu' tatap yi ká' a ce caèa, a doo mdip, mi niñ mbe keñ a sáni ruu mbo.	A big wind storm arose, and the waves beat into the boat, so much that the boat was already filled.
Ñwáè wááwá aè ye, a yu'.	They all ate, and were filled.
Li m ce caèa mbe ntoèñ nduunjïì efa rla' anaè. Bce ce mbaèñ efa gho yi ke fa ryoèñ vi m táá aèwaâa rdip anaè, mo' aè bo ñkoèp, mo' aè bo maè'. Mbaèñ yi m ce yú mbo aè mñwáá ncoèp-baa enjep feè'. Bfuè efa gho aè m ba mcáèp. A m ce jaè' beâe aè bto' wááwá ce a m ce yañ aègho.	in the middle of its street. On this side of the river and on that was the tree of life, bearing twelve kinds of fruits, yielding its fruit every month. The leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e m byemi, e du a cu aèmboè kïìloè wa'a faèdïì' ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená e be fa neè ye naè. E m cu ba aè btaèp ce a m baè'ri ba neè bcáè' a muu yïû Aisïìk ker ba muu muu yïû Jakoèp ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè woweèe wááwá ená e be fa woweèe ñgoèñ anaè.	By faith, he lived as an alien in the land of promise, as in a land not his own, dwelling in tents, with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise.
Yá neè ená blaâa Jisoès vi cu njep weâe mntee aè nfeè' wááwá. Loèr bfee ce Nyúè aè fa weèe, yá'ni ker cep aègho. Ku'si Nyúè neè byáá njáèá jáá jáèá jáá. Wee yoèp wa'a, weèe ce yoñshi Nyúè enjep ntee.	Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly; in all wisdom teaching and admonishing one another with psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your heart to the Lord.
Zhìi mâ à màʼshi nèŋkùr.	His mother died yesterday.
Nfeè' rbi aè ka' gháá, ÁÈlisabáèt aè bi muu mbañruè.	Now the time that Elizabeth should give birth was fulfilled, and she brought forth a son.
Famáè wááwá ce e yu boèñboñ, a ba yáánïì, e ke vúè embe buèu ese Nyúè ce e m boo mraa wááwá ce mi ke raa embe buèu. Nyúè yu ñwáè ce e ke kupse yïì ndeèe, ma'shi yïì beèe aè túè'njïì ka'.	Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom can be no variation, nor turning shadow.
Pitaè aè ka' duè Jáèrusaláèm, beèe ce a m ce laèa ená ñwáè gee búè ka' ba ñwáè rbyemïì naè, a lapnïì Pitaè,	When Peter had come up to Jerusalem, those who were of the circumcision contended with him,
E be vúè beèesi bjaèprïì nyor viseèe ca tá vi ba aèmboè ku' yïì nyor mboèñmboñ ce e m túr aè nfeè' ce e m fúú efa rkwe naè. Ñger ce e be geèe yuu ca aègho ku ba ñger ce aède' e loêr, beesi buu wááwá ce aè ñgoèñ na tá vi ba njep yeâ tïìi.	who will change the body of our humiliation to be conformed to the body of his glory, according to the working by which he is able even to subject all things to himself.
Pol aè m ce koèñ ená e du niñ mbe múè beèe anaè, ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a kanïì.	When Paul wanted to enter in to the people, the disciples didn't allow him.
Muŋkàʼ ba Ndukòŋ a caŋse.	Munkah and Ndukong have escaped.
Fa laèa njep wáâ ntee enáê, ‘AÈde' ñwáè du mbaè yir lá?’ ka'” (ce yi yu ená be vúè nda neè Kraâis embaè yir? lá).	"or, 'Who will descend into the abyss?' (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead.)"""
Ñwáè moè' be koo la ryoèñ ese máè ka'. Ce fa ba máè aè la rkoèñ. M túr ñger aè rfa la ryoèñ, a ker túr ñger aè rkoo li. Cena yu ba yuu ce yaè Ta aè laèa ená m geêe.”	"No one takes it away from me, but I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father."""
Yi m ba ba ená beèe ce a ce láè mncir a beèe ce a be koni buu ce Nyúè aè m kaè', yi ba ba ená rbyemïì li túr sá' ka', tá mkaè'ni anaè mi ba foñ aè cicïì.	For if those who are of the law are heirs, faith is made void, and the promise is made of no effect.
Pitaè aè ka' karsi nyor a yá ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès moè' ce Jisoès aè m koèñ se naè aèmboè e ce vúè a waâp mbuèu. A ye ce e m káèr nyor aègee Jisoès aè nfeè' woweèe a m ce ye byee, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Tataê, ñwáè ce e be fyeèni wáè a nda?” naè.	"Then Peter, turning around, saw a disciple following. This was the disciple whom Jesus sincerely loved, the one who had also leaned on Jesus' breast at the supper and asked, ""Lord, who is going to betray You?"""
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Haba! Mboè a wáè ñwáè Jus a? Yi loè efaè ká, wáè ka' ce loo mdip ese máè ce m yu njeñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè?” Jus ba beèe aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè a ke geèe buu aèbee ka'. è	"The Samaritan woman therefore said to him, ""How is it that you, being a Jew, ask for a drink from me, a Samaritan woman?"" (For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.)"
E beesïì enáê, “Tataê, a wáè nda?” E laa enáê, “A máè Jisoès ce aè ce jar neè máè naè.	"He said, ""Who are you, Lord?"" The Lord said, ""I am Jesus, whom you are persecuting."
Wɛr à cu shùumà mnoŋ btaar.	We have fasted for three days.
Yi yu boèñboñ ená mbañruèñwáè sop rtaa mbe tuè ka', njobeè' e yu rfeese Nyúè, a ba foâo Nyúè, njeñwáè aè ba foâo mbañruèñwáè.	For a man indeed ought not to have his head covered, because he is the image and glory of God, but the woman is the glory of the man.
Buu bbebep ca bsïìp vi ke fúú enjep ñwáè, gee ye e ba jaèpri aè bsii Nyúè.”	"All these evil things come from within, and defile the man."""
Rluutì rli ke gèe ŋwɛ̀ yuʼ ryaŋ sê.	Labour makes one to go through a lot of pain.
À kaʼ faʼ tatap à ku koni yuu wɛ̌ ròo.	If you work hard you will get what you want.
See ce tá'shi wa'a, ma'shi mñgúè' nyor bboèñboñ vi yáátïì aèwañ. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè m geèe viseèe mnyor aè njáâá ená mñgúè' nyor ce vi ke yááti aè vïû bcicïì naè, vi ba vïì ce a be gá' aègho seê.	whereas our presentable parts have no such need. But God composed the body together, giving more abundant honor to the inferior part,
“Ñwáè efa weâe mú ce e ka' túr njeèe rjeèe, moè' efa gho bú, e ke' ma'shïì njeèe yïû ncoèp-búè'ú-aè-mmbúè'ú aè rtuèu duè roèo yïì ce e bú naè, caar yá ka', a nda?	"Which of you men, if you had one hundred sheep, and lost one of them, wouldn't leave the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go after the one that was lost, until he found it?
Luke	Luêk	15	5	E ka' yá, baná e be lu'shi seê, koo, byáè' mbe ntuèumbáè' kúti aègho.	When he has found it, he carries it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
Luke	Luêk	15	6	E duè ba' aègho aè laè' baná e be ká' bkar vi, ba beèe ce a woweèe a ce cu mbe dïû' mo'sir, laèa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Seèe lu'shi njobeè' máè yá yaè njeèe ce e m bú naè.’	When he comes home, he calls together his friends and his neighbors, saying to them, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found my sheep which was lost!'
Luke	Luêk	15	7	M ce suñ weèe máná rlu'shïì li be ba mbe buèu wa'a njo' ñwáè moè'sir ce e kupse a ma' yïì buu bbebep, caa beèe ncoèp-búè'ú-aè-mmbúè'ú ce a yu yap beâe byáánïì, mbuèu moè' aè ker ba aègho neè woweèe aè rkupseè ka' naè.	I tell you that even so there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous people who need no repentance.
Luke	Luêk	15	8	“Yu ba njáèá njeñwáè ká ce e ka' túr mbaèa rúêú, búsi mbúè mbaèa, e ke' cú' laêm, yáèr yïì ndap, tambú roèo caar yá ka'?	Or what woman, if she had ten drachma coins, if she lost one drachma coin, wouldn't light a lamp, sweep the house, and seek diligently until she found it?
Luke	Luêk	15	9	E ka' yá, baná e be ká' bkar vi, ba beèe ce a woweèe a ce cu mbe dïû' mo'sir, laèa neè woweèe enáê, ‘Seèe lu'shi njobeè' máè yá yaè mbúè mbaèa ce e m bú naè.’	When she has found it, she calls together her friends and neighbors, saying, 'Rejoice with me, for I have found the drachma which I had lost.'
Luke	Luêk	15	10	M ce suñ weèe máná bcïìndap Nyúè embe buèu a ke lu'shi wa' foñ, ka' neè ñwáâ ñgeèe buu bbebep moè'sir ce e kupse, a ma' yïì buu bbebep.”	Even so, I tell you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner repenting."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, Nyúè aè lá nfeè' moè' ce beèe a be lúèshi ce yu nfeè' e seè'ni na. Bfeè' vi ka' caèa aèñgoo seê, Nyúè aè laa njïì enjep Dávïìd. E m ku laa ba blaèa ce weèr aè sañ neè weèe wáá naè. E m laèa enáê, “Wáè ka' yu' njeèndoñ Nyúè ntïìni na, aè fa teèe tu ka'.”	"he again defines a certain day, today, saying through David so long a time afterward (just as has been said), ""Today if you will hear his voice, don't harden your hearts."""
Yoèp byáá njáèá jáá jáèá jáá, laa buu neè beèe neè byáá ca. Yoèp byáá, ku'si Tata Jisoès neè yo ntee wááwá.	speaking to one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs; singing, and making melody in your heart to the Lord;
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Muu waè, lo rbyemïì li geèe wáè ke'seè. Duè yo yu neè rfúteè-ñwáè.”	"He said to her, ""Daughter, cheer up. Your faith has made you well. Go in peace."""
E ka' beèesi wa'a, a laêa, mutuè caè aè táá. E ka' táá, Felep ba ñwáâ nsoèñ anaè a suu njep roè, Felep aè baptïìr ye.	He commanded the chariot to stand still, and they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptized him.
E ka' ghoèni woweèe, a ma'shi woweèe, Nyúè aè lor ye a du aègho mbe buèu.	It happened, while he blessed them, that he withdrew from them, and was carried up into heaven.
Baná ñwáè ce e ka' lor mú ncir efa mncir ca aètáèr, yá'ni beèe mo' foñ ená a gee wa'a, baná ñgaèñ be keèe ba ñwáâ ñká' mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè. Ñwáè ce e ka' lá mncir ca, ce yá'ni beèe vi, baná ñgaèñ be ba ñwáâ ñgoèr mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.	Whoever, therefore, shall break one of these least commandments, and teach others to do so, shall be called least in the Kingdom of Heaven; but whoever shall do and teach them shall be called great in the Kingdom of Heaven.
Woweèe a ker laa tatap enáê, “E karsi btu beâe aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè wááwá neè li ryá'nïì káè' efa ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a daa aègho a ba' aèfa.”	"But they insisted, saying, ""He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, beginning from Galilee even to this place."""
‘M ce suñ weèe máná ñwáè ce e ka' túr yuu, baná a be keèr fa ye buu moè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr yuu ka', baná a be koo ka' mú yïì ce e túr naè ese ye.	For I tell you that to everyone who has, will more be given; but from him who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away from him.
Máè suñ weèe ená weèe be kwe neè yeè buu bbebep, njobeè' weèe aè ka' tá byemi ená m yu ñwáè ce m yu ka', baná weèe be kwe neè yeè buu bbebep.”	"I said therefore to you that you will die in your sins; for unless you believe that I am he, you will die in your sins."""
Seèe be ka' laèa seeká seè'ni aè? Waè' seèe be laèa seená mncir yu yuu bebep a? AÈde' yi ba wa' ka' koo múcaèr. Yuu ce yi m geèe m ka' riñ yuu bebep, aè m ba mncir. Ncir yi m ka' tá baè laèa enáê, “Fa gani ka'” ka', máè m ba rïìñ ená ñwáè e ke gani yuu, baná ñgaèñ aè geèe yuu bebep ka'.	"What shall we say then? Is the law sin? May it never be! However, I wouldn't have known sin, except through the law. For I wouldn't have known coveting, unless the law had said, ""You shall not covet."""
Nfò wèe a vʉ̀.	Nfor and the others (his friends) have come.
Ncïìndap Nyúè ca aè laa neè máè enáê, “AÈde' blaèa ca vi caa aè cici ka', vi yu mini. Taèr Nyúè ce e ke fa yi yú' neè yi ñgaâa ncep ntuu, a ñwáè ce e tuu yïì ncïìndap ená e vú yá beèe ce a ce faè' neè ye, duñshi woweèe buu ce ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá vi koni.”	"He said to me, ""These words are faithful and true. The Lord God of the spirits of the prophets sent his angel to show to his bondservants the things which must happen soon."""
Yi yu mini ená e m yañ, a ku táá yïû ñkwe, Nyúè aè ke' byemïì ka'. Nyúè aè ka' kani wa'a, a koosi ba mnse neè ye, a koosi neè máè foñ, njobeè' e m ba kwe kwe, yaè ñgá' aè ba báèr.	For indeed he was sick, nearly to death, but God had mercy on him; and not on him only, but on me also, that I might not have sorrow on sorrow.
Haba! Wɛ̀ ku kʉti wɛɛ a?	What! Have you already returned?
Mɛ̀ teeshi yuʼ anà à bkeŋ a kaʼ baŋsi.	I cut the banana bunch into smaller bunches before keeping it to get ripe.
E ghashïì ye aè rkoo a ye a fúú efa laè' anaè. A ka' duè baè', a ce ye neè mce nje mmïìr, a la' mmbo mbe yeâ nduè, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce yá buu seè'ni a?”	He took hold of the blind man by the hand, and brought him out of the village. When he had spit on his eyes, and laid his hands on him, he asked him if he saw anything.
AÈmboè weèr ce faè' aèbee weèr Nyúè weèe na, weèr ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe fa maè'shi tá rboèñ Nyúè ce weèe aè koni na li bú aè cicïì ka'.	Working together, we entreat also that you not receive the grace of God in vain,
Nduunjì zhi lɛŋ sê.	This road is very smooth.
Njeèndoñ aè laa embe buèu enáê, “Cena yu muu waè ce máè koèñ seê, a ce yu' rboèñ neè ye.”	"Behold, a voice out of the heavens said, ""This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased."""
Koni neè ye boèñboñ neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè aèmboè nfúr weèe ce weèe woweèe yu aèbee weèe Tata Jisoès weèe. Yi boèñ ená weèe gú'shi neè njáèá ñwáè aèmboè ye anaè.	Receive him therefore in the Lord with all joy, and hold such in honor,
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè seèe, liseèe rla' li yu ba mbe buèu mbe dïì' ce seèe ce keè' seená yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis be vúè embo, geèe tá seèe luêñ.	For our citizenship is in heaven, from where we also wait for a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ;
Mnoèñ vi m báti bbaa tá a ka' ye Ñkaâ' caèasi mndap, ba ñkaè' ce a ke ye bráâd ce a láè yis njo ka'. Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ce roèo njïì tá a bo koo Jisoès aè bfee, yú.	It was now two days before the feast of the Passover and the unleavened bread, and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might seize him by deception, and kill him.
tá ñgúè beâe seè'ni a bo laèa yuu kuèu ñgaâa ntuu Nyúè ce a m yúshi, ká' embe nfeè' ce a m geèe ñgoèñ ca.	that the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation of the world, may be required of this generation;
Máè m bu' mmbo neè Taitoès ená e vú yá weèe, a laa neè nfúr moè' ená e du a ye. Waè' Taitoès aè m bo' weèe a koshi buu ese weèe a? Weèr Taitoès ku ba ñwáè moè'sir, a ce geèe yeèr buu neè ntee e mo'sir.	I exhorted Titus, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus take any advantage of you? Didn't we walk in the same spirit? Didn't we walk in the same steps?
Lap rkìŋ rli yu nè wèr.	Their pot is in our keeping.
Pailáèt aè beesïì enáê, “Yuu ce máè sañ, a yuu ce máè sañ.”	"Pilate answered, ""What I have written, I have written."""
Lùr anà tèe sê.	That stone is very hard.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, m ka' ba niñ coêr, m koñ máná m laa mbúè laèa ta aè li ce beèe a rïìñ, tá m bo yá'ni beèe, neè ce ená m laa mmbúè laèa ncúèkïì aè li ce aède' ñwáè yu' ka'.	However in the assembly I would rather speak five words with my understanding, that I might instruct others also, than ten thousand words in another language.
Vʉ̀ ka sò deʼ ɛ.	Please come and lets talk.
M ce laèa ya neè weèe ená ñwáè aè ka' juu ñgwa yïì, ke' ba njobeè' ñgwa yïì anaè aè noèñ a mbañruèñwáèè moè' ka', baná e geèe ñgwa yïì anaè aè noñ a nduu ñwáè moè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' lor njeñwáè ce e fúú bguèu, baná e koo ñgwa ñwáè moè'.	but I tell you that whoever puts away his wife, except for the cause of sexual immorality, makes her an adulteress; and whoever marries her when she is put away commits adultery.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa enáê, “ÁÈháê! AÈ ce laèa seè'ni rara, aè ker ce maè' ba ñgaèa ka'.	"His disciples said to him, ""Behold, now you speak plainly, and speak no figures of speech."
Máâ cu weèr beèe ce mncir vi kur woweèe ka', gee ñgeèe aèmboè woweèe wa'a, tá m bo so woweèe neè Jisos Kraêis. M ce geèe wa'a, ke' ba ená máè loèr mncir ce Nyúè aè m fa aètáèr ka'. M ce yu'ni neè mncir Jisos Kraâis seê.	to those who are without law, as without law (not being without law toward God, but under law toward Christ), that I might win those who are without law.
Njàa zhìi à m bʉ.	His axe got missing.
E duèñshi yi ñger, a da'si ñgaâa naèatu.	He has shown strength with his arm. He has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts.
Woweèe a m loèr beèe ca a tár njeptii ñgaâa ntuu, woweèe a loo, a lá map mmbo mbe waâp nduè.	whom they set before the apostles. When they had prayed, they laid their hands on them.
M ce suñ weèe buu ca faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo bo' wee neè cuèu ka'.	Now this I say that no one may delude you with persuasiveness of speech.
Beèe ce a m tuu anaè a ka' kúti baè' mbe ndaèp, a yá ená ñwáè rfaè' anaè aè keè'se wáá.	Those who were sent, returning to the house, found that the servant who had been sick was well.
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' tá koo kúú Nyúè aèmboè muu ñká' ka' baná aède' ñgaèñ niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè anaè ka'.”	"Most certainly, I tell you, whoever doesn't receive the Kingdom of God like a little child, he will in no way enter into it."""
Nfeè' ce vúè, nfeè' anaè aè ghááte seè'ni na, ce ñgaâa rloo ce mini a be loo neè Taèr aè yú' ker ba aè mini. A njáèá ñgaâa rloo ce Taèr e koèñ.	But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for the Father seeks such to be his worshippers.
E m túr mú ñwaè' mo' ce a búèr wáá mba yeâ boè. E m tár yi kuâu maè' mbenduè rdip rgoèr, a tár yi kuâu ñkoèp mbenduè nshe, a waa,	He had in his hand a little open book. He set his right foot on the sea, and his left on the land.
Weèr táá aètu Kraêis, a ce laèa buu ca aèmboè ce laèa lá ba Nyúè seese neè weèe wa'a. Weèr ce bu' mmbo neè weèe aètu Kraâis ená weèe kúti aèbee weèe Nyúè weèe.	We are therefore ambassadors on behalf of Christ, as though God were entreating by us: we beg you on behalf of Christ, be reconciled to God.
Bkúú enjep ñgoèñ a m ba'shi nyor, a ñgaâa sa' to' weèe a vúseè aèbee aè rmaè' bïìr a Tata Nyúè, ker ba yïì Kraêis.’	The kings of the earth take a stand, and the rulers take council together, against the Lord, and against his Christ.'
AÈde' ñwáè lor mruâ' mfi lá njep mñguèp mruè' vïû brúèú ka'. E ka' gee wa'a baná mruâ' mfi anaè mi be loè koo, to'shi mñguèp mruè' anaè, tá mruè' mi kúte aè nsheè, tá mñguèp mruè' anaè vi bú aè cicïì.	No one puts new wine into old wineskins, or else the new wine will burst the skins, and it will be spilled, and the skins will be destroyed.
Nfò yu yaa ràrà.	Nfor is my relative.
E ka' laèa wa' wáá, a laa neè Tomas enáê, “Vúè neè yoè ntubo, yu'shi mbena, naèa yo bo joo yaè mbeèp nyor aègho. Fa keèr tarni ka', byemi.”	"Then he said to Thomas, ""Reach here your finger, and see my hands. Reach here your hand, and put it into my side. Don't be unbelieving, but believing."""
Yu njo' rlii Kraâis ce ená woweèe a m fúú aè mbeè a ke' ce koo yuu mo' ese beèe ce a máñni Nyúè ka'.	because for the sake of the Name they went out, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
Jisoès aè m yi yuu ce woweèe a ce laèa. A laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce laèa fa weâe mú ená weèe túr bráâd ka' njoká? Weèe aè be riñ buu ka' a? Waè' weèe aè be riñ mbuèu efa gho ka' a? Waè' ku ba nteèe-tu a?	"Jesus, perceiving it, said to them, ""Why do you reason that it's because you have no bread? Don't you perceive yet, neither understand? Is your heart still hardened?"
Jisoès aè ka' yu', a laa enáê, “Beèe ce a ke roèo ñwáè mcáèp e ke ba ñgaâa byañ, ke' ba beâe btatap ka'.	"When Jesus heard it, he said to them, ""Those who are healthy have no need for a physician, but those who are sick do."
‘Duè yá beèe ca laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe be yu' keèr yu', yu' ka'. Weèe be keè' keèr keè', yá ka'.	saying, 'Go to this people, and say, in hearing, you will hear, but will in no way understand. In seeing, you will see, but will in no way perceive.
ba Jáms ce e m ba muu yïì Sábáèdïî, ba nfúr yïì Joân ce Jisoès aè m too woweèe ená Boanárgáès, ce mbuèu efa gho yu ená “Boo sa'mbeèñ”,	James the son of Zebedee; John, the brother of James, and he surnamed them Boanerges, which means, Sons of Thunder;
Máè yá máná aè yu ñwáè ntee sii, yo ñgeâe bebep yi kur wáè.”	"For I see that you are in the gall of bitterness and in the bondage of iniquity."""
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m taase Abraèhaêm, a laa ená e lor Aisïìk ce aè m ku ba muu yïì ce e m túr caè'caè' tañshi tañshïì aègho neè ye naè, aè m ku ba ba rbyemïì ce li m geèe, Abraèham aè ka' yu'ni. E m tami nyor aè rtañshi tañshïì neè Aisïìk, ka' Nyúè aè m kaè' neè ye ená yïì ñgúè be yaa se wa'a.	By faith, Abraham, being tested, offered up Isaac. Yes, he who had gladly received the promises was offering up his one and only son;
E m kwe wa'a, a ker kwe ka', tá yuu bebep yi ker geèe yuu mo' neè ye ka'. Li rcu ce e ce cu seè'ni na, e ce cu a Nyúè.	For the death that he died, he died to sin one time; but the life that he lives, he lives to God.
A mbuèu ce m ce ke' máná a ka' teni mnsa' m riñ aèmboè buu yu, m ka' tuu ye tá e vú yá weèe.	Therefore I hope to send him at once, as soon as I see how it will go with me.
Jisoès aè ka' ba bfeè' ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, a woweèe a du ñkaè' ce a m ce duè njep feè' njep feè' naè.	When he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem according to the custom of the feast,
E bipshïì enáê, “AÈ koni ká?” Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Buu ce vi koni yu buu ce vi kuèu Jisoâs aè rla' Nasaráèt ce e m ba ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè ce e m ce laèa, ce geèe buu bghagha', a ba ñwáâ ñgoèr aè bsii Nyúè ba beèe.	"He said to them, ""What things?"" They said to him, ""The things concerning Jesus, the Nazarene, who was a prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people;"
Tee ntaaŋguu anà bkʉ̀kʉ̌ bbaa.	Cut that stick into two halves.
A mɛ̀ tu embe ŋgwaʼ.	I am the leader of the meeting.
Wee kaari wáá, lor ñwáè anaè fa mbaè mmbo Sataèn aè ñger Tata Jisoès, tá e bo yá ñgá', tá Nyúè bo jaè' li ryoèñ aè noèñ ce Tata Jisos kraâis be kúti njep ñgoèñ na.	are to deliver such a one to Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Duèñshi neè neè beèe ca ená weèe aè koèñ woweèe neè mini-ñwáè. Weèe ka' gee wa'a, baná bcor wááwá a be yu', rïìñ ená naèatu ce weèr aè m naèa neè weèe naè, aè m ba naèatu mini.	Therefore show the proof of your love to them in front of the assemblies, and of our boasting on your behalf.
Weèe aè ka' ker túr yuu mo' ce weèe aè ba laèa, weèe laa ba mbe rcuteè ce beèe ce a ce sa' rla' a ká'.	But if you seek anything about other matters, it will be settled in the regular assembly.
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aè cu' ñgá' ce e m ba njep ghee yi njep roè ba mdip ce mi ce fúú enjep nsheè. Mdip anaè mi beeñgeèr aè bláá.	The third poured out his bowl into the rivers and springs of water, and they became blood.
Woweèe a m loèr muu nsuènsuè ca nteèe a du aègho, yap ntee yi fúteè seê.	They brought the boy in alive, and were greatly comforted.
Ka' woweèe a m laèa buu ca wa'a, woweèe a m loèr nfeè' se aè rgeèe ená beèe ca a borni efa rtañshi tañshïì neè woweèe.	Even saying these things, they hardly stopped the multitudes from making a sacrifice to them.
Nsuu yer zhi ki sê.	Our farm has overgrown.
E laa enáê, “Vúè neè aègho fa neè máè.”	"He said, ""Bring them here to me."""
Jisoès aè ker ma' ñgaèa moè' neè woweèe enáê, “Kúú Nyúè embe buèu yi yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e m byeè ñgúè buu bboèñboñ aè mñkúè.	"He set another parable before them, saying, ""The Kingdom of Heaven is like a man who sowed good seed in his field,"
Woweèe a m kúti aè laè', a kupshi mgúr mo' tá a bo yo' gúâú ñwáè aègho. AÈ m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, woweèe a lúshïì aèmboè ncir yi m laèa.	They returned, and prepared spices and ointments. On the Sabbath they rested according to the commandment.
Ŋgwe zhisèe zhi ke waa kaʼ.	Our dogs donʼt bark.
Nfeè' aè ka' gháá, e gee máè riñ muu yïì tá m bo suñ beèe enje jáá aèmboè muu yïì anaè. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè máè ke' cu máná ñwáè moè' suñ máè yuu ce m gee ka'.	to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I didn't immediately confer with flesh and blood,
E suŋ wèr rghàghar àmbò ŋgwe ba ŋkaa.	He told us a story about a dog and a monkey.
Baná aè rmïìsïì, bfúr waê, weèe lu'shi njobeè' weèe yu weèe Tata weèe. Yi geèe mnsa' neè máè aè ker sañ buu ca neè weèe ka'. Buu anaè be jaè' weèe tá weèe ke' bo lá'ti ka'.	Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not tiresome, but for you it is safe.
Yuu ce m be fa weèe ncep aègho na yu ba yuu ce m be yoèñshi weèe aègho yoèñshi ka'. E ke ba aè nfeè' weèe aè vúè aèbee aè rgeèe rloo neè Nyúè, weèe ce geèe ba ñgeâe bebep caa ñgeâe boèñboñ.	But in giving you this command, I don't praise you, that you come together not for the better but for the worse.
A m̀ ̀ ba haʼŋgàani wèr à yɛ woowèe.	Last year we saw them.
“Habai, Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt, yuu ce aè ce roèo ese weèr yu ba ká? Wáè vúè aè ryúshi weèr a? M rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce aè yu. AÈ yu ñwáâ nrara ce e loè ese Nyúè.”	"saying, ""Ha! What do we have to do with you, Jesus, you Nazarene? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!"""
AÈde' beèe a laa enáê, ‘A yi mbena’ na, káè enáê, ‘A yi njena’ na ka', njobeè' kúú Nyúè yi yu fa weâe mú.”	"neither will they say, 'Look, here!' or, 'Look, there!' for behold, the Kingdom of God is within you."""
AÈ m ba entombïì, beèe mo' efa weèe a ce geèe njáèá ñgeèe ca. AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na, Tata Nyúè aè su'sïì weèe, a ker gee weèe aè ba jáá, a ba byáánïì aè ñger Jisoès Kraâis ker ba aè ñger Yú' yïìseèe Nyúè.	Such were some of you, but you were washed. But you were sanctified. But you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
M ce laèa neè weèe aè rlii Tata Jisoès ená weèe be' ñwaè' ca neè bfúr wááwá.	I solemnly command you by the Lord that this letter be read to all the holy brothers.
Jisoès aè waa yú' anaè enáê, “Cu nyañ, fúú enjep ye.” Yi nyár ñgaèñ a ma' aè nsheè a waâp bsii, a fúú enjep ye, a ke' báási ye ka'.	"Jesus rebuked him, saying, ""Be silent, and come out of him!"" When the demon had thrown him down in their midst, he came out of him, having done him no harm."
Kèŋ anà zhi yu too a?	Is that door open?
Kuushi neè ená weèe aè m túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè Kraâis ka'. Weèe aè m ba ñgúè beèe Isráèl ce Nyúè aè m ce naè ka'. Weèe aè m túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye a yi beèe njo' mkaè'ni ce e m geèe a woweèe naè ka'. Weèe aè m ce cu le rcu enjep ñgoèñ na, a túr yuu mo' ce aède' weèe lá mmir mbenduè mo ka', a riñ Nyúè ka'.	that you were at that time separate from Christ, alienated from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenants of the promise, having no hope and without God in the world.
AÈmboè yaè ta koèñ máè, má máè aè koñ ye naè. Máè tami nyor aè rkwe njo' yi.	even as the Father knows me, and I know the Father. I lay down my life for the sheep.
Woweèe a ka' ce duè, ñwáè moè' aè yá Jisoès a laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè ka' ce duè ba fá, baná m be kuè ba fa wáâ mbuèu.”	"As they went on the way, a certain man said to him, ""I want to follow you wherever you go, Lord."""
To' yi be maè' bïìr a to' mo', ñkúú ma' bïìr a ñkúú moè'. Njeè be koo, tá ñgoèñ yi ci'ti aè bdïì' jáá jáèá jáá.	For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom; and there will be famines, plagues, and earthquakes in various places.
Woweèe a m vúè a ba' aè rlaè' Báètsaidaè, beèe mo' a vú neè nfeèp ená Jisoès joo ye neè bo tá e ke'se.	He came to Bethsaida. They brought a blind man to him, and begged him to touch him.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba ce Nyúè aè m tuu. Li rlii li m ba ená Joân.	There came a man, sent from God, whose name was John.
“M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená weèr ce laèa ba buu ce weèr rïìñ, a ce suñ weèe ba buu ce weèr aè yá neè mer mmir. Weèr aè ka' ce suñ weèe buu ca, weèe aè ke' byemïì ka'.	Most certainly I tell you, we speak that which we know, and testify of that which we have seen, and you don't receive our witness.
Jisoès aè ka' fúr yú' nyúèrkaè' anaè, ñwáè anaè aè ká' a ce laèa. Beèe ce a m ba aèfo a bááñgeèr seê, a laa enáê, “Njáèá yuu ca yi m be koni aè ñgoèñ Isráèl ka'.”	"When the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. The multitudes marveled, saying, ""Nothing like this has ever been seen in Israel!"""
Beèe aè mmbaa ca a yu bce Oleâf bbaa ce a m sañ aèmboè vi naè, a ker ba mú btábuèr blam bbaa ce vi táá kuèntombïì neè Nyúè ce e túr ñgoèñ wááwá naè.	These are the two olive trees and the two lampstands, standing before the Lord of the earth.
Weèe aè yá aèmboè Nyúè aè fa weèe yi Yú', a ker ce geèe buu bbáèá a weâe mú njïì enjep Yú' anaè. Nyúè ce geèe buu ca njobeè' weèe ce láè mncir, káè njobeè' weèe aè yu' nsuñ mboèñmboñ, a byemi?	He therefore who supplies the Spirit to you, and works miracles among you, does he do it by the works of the law, or by hearing of faith?
M ce loo máná Nyúè aè ka' byemi, e fa máè fáñ seè'ni tá m vú yá weèe.	requesting, if by any means now at last I may be prospered by the will of God to come to you.
Nsïìi rkwe yu buu bbebep, ñger buu bbebep aè ba mncir.	The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
Beèe ce a m byemi neè Jisoès aè rla' Antïìyoèk a m ku lu'shi seê, a ruu neè Yú' Rara.	The disciples were filled with joy with the Holy Spirit.
Duè neè yá ba njeèe embe ndúè' Isráèl ce yi m bú naè.	Rather, go to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
Buu ce weèr aè m suñ weèe aèmboè rvúè Jisos Kraâis ce e m vúè neè ñger Nyúè naè aè m ba ba mghaèghar ce beèe a sañ neè wap bfee naè ka'. Weèr aè m yá yi ñger neè mer mmir.	For we did not follow cunningly devised fables, when we made known to you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but we were eyewitnesses of his majesty.
Blaâa Nyúè ba rloo vi geèe buu ca vi ba byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	For it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
Yi yu aèndeèe ená a loèr ñgoè' luèr cúú ye kuè ndoñ, lor ye ma' njep rdip rgoèr, neè yïì ce ená e gee moè' efa boo bká'ká' ca tá e gee yuu bebep.	It would be better for him if a millstone were hung around his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, rather than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Mɛ̀ fuse à rfàʼ anà sê.	I am very inattentive to that work.
Mak ba AÈristakoès, Demaès, ker ba Lukas ce weèr woweèe ce faè', a caè'ni wáè foñ.	as do Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, and Luke, my fellow workers.
Bfúr waê, m ce koèñ neè ya ntee-ñwáè, a ker ce loo neè Nyúè ená beèe Isráèl a luêñ.	Brothers, my heart's desire and my prayer to God is for Israel, that they may be saved.
Nyúè aè m geèe buu bghagha' ce vi m ba jáá se njïì enjep Poêl.	God worked special miracles by the hands of Paul,
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na, seèe aè luñ efa mncir. Seèe aè kweñger, yuu ce yi m kur seèe naè, yi ker túr ñger mbe seâe nduè ka'. Seèe ce faè' neè Nyúè seè'ni na, a ce láè mncir vïû brúèú ce a sañ naè ka'. Seèe ce faè' neè Nyúè ba aè njïû nfi, ce Yú' yi ce duèñshi seèe.	But now we have been discharged from the law, having died to that in which we were held; so that we serve in newness of the spirit, and not in oldness of the letter.
Noèñ anaè yi be ba tá m fa ya yú' neè ya ñgaâa mfaè' wááwá, mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge, tá woweèe a cep ya ntuu neè beèe.	Yes, and on my servants and on my handmaidens in those days, I will pour out my Spirit, and they will prophesy.
Buu ca vi m ku koni aèmboè AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m sañ naè. E m sañ enáê, “Tataê, waè' ñwáè moè' yu ce e byemi blaâa Nyúè ce weèr aè feè'shi na a? Waè' ñwáè moè' yu ce e rïìñ yo ñger a?”	"that the word of Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which he spoke, ""Lord, who has believed our report? To whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?"""
Ŋwɛ̀ bepntee e ke sʉ̀ti yuu kaʼ.	An ill-tempered person doesnʼt hide anything.
Nyúè ce e ce sañ na be keè liiti, tá ñwáá yi bañ aèmboè bláá. Tá noèñ yïû Tata ce yi be keè ba goèr keèr ba jáá se naè yi ka' gháá.	The sun will be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and glorious day of the Lord comes.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “E ba gee eká neè wáè? E ba gee aè njáâá ká wáè ka' ce yá buu?”	"They said to him again, ""What did he do to you? How did he open your eyes?"""
Yïì anaè yi ka' mïì, máè ka' naèa mmir fyá' mbekïì, a yá aèmboè ncúèúndúè' embe buèu yi múè'ti. Máè ker yu' njeèndoñ ce e m laèa neè máè a ba aèmboè rsoèñ li ke laèa naè. Ñwáè anaè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Vúè mbena tá m duñshi wáè buu ce vi bii ka' koni.”	"After these things I looked and saw a door opened in heaven, and the first voice that I heard, like a trumpet speaking with me, was one saying, ""Come up here, and I will show you the things which must happen after this."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' Jisos Kraâis aè m niñ mbe dïì' anaè, e m duè a ba' mbe dïû' rara ce yi caèa ñger naè nfeè' moè'sir, yi ku mi wa'a. E m duè mbo ba neè bláá mbú káè bláá muu naè' ka'. E m duè ba neè vi bláá. E m loèr vi bláá anaè a tee seèe efa ñgá' ce seèe aè m ce yá njo' buu bbebep ce seèe aè m ce geèe naè nfeseè.	nor yet through the blood of goats and calves, but through his own blood, entered in once for all into the Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption.
Woowèe a zhe baa mâpŋgiʼ.	They have eaten fufu alone.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' ncir anaè, yuu bebep yi konïì fáñ a gee máè ce gani buu njáèá jáá jáèá jáá. Mncir vi ka' tá ba aègho ka', buu bbebep yáátïì ka'.	But sin, finding occasion through the commandment, produced in me all kinds of coveting. For apart from the law, sin is dead.
Bfúr waê, tá m kuushi weèe aèmboè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce máè m feè'shi neè weèe naè. Nsuñ ca yu nsuñ ce weèe aè m yu' a byemi, a táá njo.	Now I declare to you, brothers, the Good News which I preached to you, which also you received, in which you also stand,
Pol ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ce jáèr, a m naètïû aè rla' Pafoès a niñ mbe keñ a du aè rla' Págaè aè ñgoâñ Paèmfilïìyaè. A ka' baè', Joân aè ma'shïì woweèe a kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	Now Paul and his company set sail from Paphos, and came to Perga in Pamphylia. John departed from them and returned to Jerusalem.
E m duè a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca aè mndap mloo wááwá ce vi m ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.	He was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, yi yu boèñboñ ená m kuushi weèe buu ca aè nfeè' wááwá aèmboè m ku bii nteèe na, tá m bo doèoshi weèe aègho.	I think it right, as long as I am in this tent, to stir you up by reminding you;
E laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Tataê, máè byemi neè wáè.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a gú'shi neè ye.	"He said, ""Lord, I believe!"" and he worshiped him."
Jus a m lïìp máè neè ñgwaèa ce woweèe a ke lïìp beèe aègho ñkaèraè' ncoèp- búè'ú-aè-mntaar naè, nfeè' taê.	Five times from the Jews I received forty stripes minus one.
E gheʼ mɛ̀, mɛ̀ riŋ à rkasi ŋkòŋ laa baa àgho kaʼ.	He has inconvenient me and I donʼt know how to turn the stick with which I am stirring fufu.
E ce jɛ̀r àbtɛŋ.	He is walking with his feet sideward.
Bfʉr bvii a ke zhɛ̀ɛ sê, ŋgɛʼni moʼ ŋwɛ̌ nlee.	His brothers steal a lot, especially the oldest one.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa keè'ni Ndap Nyúè, ker ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, a ka' yu', bfee vi jep woweèe, woweèe a ká' a ce tarni yuu ce aède' yi lo ba.	Now when the high priest, the captain of the temple, and the chief priests heard these words, they were very perplexed about them and what might become of this.
Jisoès aè laa neè ñwáè ce rkoo li m kwe ye anaè enáê, “Naèti vú mbena!”	"He said to the man who had his hand withered, ""Stand up."""
E m ye leè', a laa enáê, “Wáè ka' bipshi ka' njáèá ká, m ku fa neè wáè, ka' nto'nïì efa ya ñgoèñ.”	"He swore to her, ""Whatever you shall ask of me, I will give you, up to half of my kingdom."""
A ka' nyáá neè yuu aè rraa, baná yuu anaè yi yááti aèwañ.	But all things, when they are reproved, are revealed by the light, for everything that reveals is light.
M be duèñshi weèe máná Muu Ñwáè túr ñger njep ñgoèñ na aè rfoèosi beèe efa yaèp buu bbebep.”	"But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins""--he said to the paralytic--"
E geèe seèe aè luêñ, a ká' seèe ená seèe cu rcu rrara, aè ke' ba njo' rfaè' mo' ce seèe aè geèe neè ye ka'. E m ká' seèe ba aèmboè e m láè ená yi ba, ker ba njobeè' Jisos Kraêis. E m kwaè'shi buu ca tá ñgoèñ yi ka' keè ba.	who saved us and called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before times eternal,
Du àmbùu Emma suŋ ye enɛ m̀ ce kɛʼ ye.	Follow Emma and tell him that I am calling for him.
Jisoès aè ká' a ce suñ woweèe enáê, “Lor neè nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka'.	"Jesus, answering, began to tell them, ""Be careful that no one leads you astray."
Nyúè aè m kaè' Abraèham ker ba ñgúè Abraèham ená e be fa ñgoèñ neè woweèe. Nyúè aè m kaè' neè Abraèham wa'a njobeè' e m ce láè mncir ka'. E m kaè' wa'a njobeè' Abraèham aè m byemi neè ye a ba yáánïì a yeâ bsii.	For the promise to Abraham and to his seed that he should be heir of the world wasn't through the law, but through the righteousness of faith.
Nyúè aè ka' káè' ce coo, beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú a vú a yá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Laèa tá beèe ca a duse aè mla' ce mi yu aètútú, ker ba aè mla' ce mi yu aè mñkúè, yá ená aède' aè konïì dïì' rnoèñ, ker koni yuu ye foñ lá, njobeè' seèe yu aènjïìsaèp efa mla'.”	"The day began to wear away; and the twelve came, and said to him, ""Send the multitude away, that they may go into the surrounding villages and farms, and lodge, and get food, for we are here in a deserted place."""
E be keè sa' mbe ndúè' Jakoèp aè nfeè' wááwá, tá yi kúú yi mi ka'.”	"and he will reign over the house of Jacob forever. There will be no end to his Kingdom."""
Faèdïì' ce beèe a ka' tá koni weèe ka', weèe kashïì nfúènfú efa weâe mkuèu aè nfeè' ce weèe ce loè, aè rduèñshi ená woweèe a geèe yuu bebep.”	"As many as don't receive you, when you depart from that city, shake off even the dust from your feet for a testimony against them."""
E ka' laèa buu ca wa'a, a ce mce aè nsheè, a top nshe aègho a yo' nfeèp anaè aègho nje mmïìr,	When he had said this, he spat on the ground, made mud with the saliva, anointed the blind man's eyes with the mud,
Nyúè aè ka' suèusi ye embe kúú, a ce Dávïìd aè yaèp ñkúú. E m laèa yuu a kuu ye enáê, ‘Máè yá Dávïìd muu Jásïì e ba ñwáè ce e ghááte aè ñwáè ce e be geèe buu wááwá ce m koèñ.’	When he had removed him, he raised up David to be their king, to whom he also testified, 'I have found David the son of Jesse, a man after my heart, who will do all my will.'
À ce dù ba fɛ?	Where are you going?
Noèñ anaè aè m ba noèñ ce a m ce tami nyor aè rye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap. Nyúè aè m káè' a ce kuèu ñgoèñ aè nfeè' anaè. Pailáèt aè laa neè beèe enáê, “A yeè ñkúú na.”	"Now it was the Preparation Day of the Passover, at about the sixth hour. He said to the Jews, ""Behold, your King!"""
Sɛʼ efa rjɛ̀r anà à ba ba enɛ mɛ̀ yɛ ŋkar àa.	The advantage of the journey was that I saw my friend.
Jisoès aè lapnïì yú' nyúèrkaè' anaè, yi fúú enjep muu anaè, e ku ke'seè aè nfeè' anaè.	Jesus rebuked him, the demon went out of him, and the boy was cured from that hour.
Ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Jairoès, ce aè m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr moè' embe ndaèp rloo, aè vúê, a ka' yá Jisoès, a gwe njep yeâ tïìi,	Behold, one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name, came; and seeing him, he fell at his feet,
AÈmboè weèe yu beèe Tataê, baná weèe yu'ni neè neè ñgaâa rsa' wááwá ce beèe a láè ená a sa' weèe. Káè yu ñkúú áè, weèe yu'ni neè ye aèmboè ñwáè ce ñger bto' wááwá yi yu mba yeâ mmboè.	Therefore subject yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake: whether to the king, as supreme;
Noèñ entombïì efa Ñkaâ' ye bráâd ce a láè yis njo ka' yi m gháá. AÈ m ba noèñ ce a m ce sháshi bya' ce a be ye ñkaè' aègho. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a bipshi neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce koèñ ená weèr fár byee ba fá, tá aè bo ye?”	"On the first day of unleavened bread, when they sacrificed the Passover, his disciples asked him, ""Where do you want us to go and prepare that you may eat the Passover?"""
Woweèe a daè' njïì, a ce yá'ni beèe ená beèe aè m fúú efa rkwe war. Woweèe a yá'ni wa'a a ce geèe beèe mo' a ce tarni yuu ce woweèe a m byemi.	men who have erred concerning the truth, saying that the resurrection is already past, and overthrowing the faith of some.
E m ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce máè m tuu weèe, a laa máná weèe fa loèr posaè káè baèa, káè blaba' ka' naè, waè' weèe aè m buu yuu mo' a?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Weèr aè m buu yuu mo' ka'.”	"He said to them, ""When I sent you out without purse, and wallet, and shoes, did you lack anything?"" They said, ""Nothing."""
Beèe ce a ke sa' ñgoèñ ca a m rïìñ wa' ka'. Woweèe a m ba riñ a m ba taa Tata ce e yu ñwáè foèo mbe kïìntaa ka'.	which none of the rulers of this world has known. For had they known it, they wouldn't have crucified the Lord of glory.
Wèr à koni ŋkèe mbe wěr ndàp.	We have had a guest in our house.
M ce suñ weèe ená m be keèr no mruè' ce a geèe neè mbaèñ ce ca ka', caar baè' aè nfeè' ce kúú Nyúè yi be keè vúè.”	"for I tell you, I will not drink at all again from the fruit of the vine, until the Kingdom of God comes."""
Woweèe a duê, a ce fe'shi aè ñgoèñ wááwá. Tata aè m jaè' woweèe a fa woweèe ñger aè rgeèe buu bghagha' tá beèe a bo rïìñ ená blaèa ce woweèe a ce feè'shi vi yu mini.]	They went out, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs that followed. Amen.
Wɛ̀ m̀ mìsi ŋwàʼ ntombǐ nè mɛ̀.	You finished school before me.
Keè'se neè ce loo faè dïì' weèe gwe rmoèoshïì ka'. Ntee njep rbúè, bsáè nje nyoèr.”	"Watch and pray, that you may not enter into temptation. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak."""
Rbúâ ÁÈlisabáèt li ka' ba mñwáá ntuunfu, Nyúè aè tuu yïì ncïìndap ce a too ená Gaberyaè, aè rla' Nasaráèt aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê.	Now in the sixth month, the angel Gabriel was sent from God to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
Beèe a fúú a du aè ryá yuu ce yi m koni. Woweèe a du a yá Jisoès, a ker yá ñwáè ce byú' mnyúâmkaè' vi m fúú enjep ye naè aèmboè e cu njeptii Jisoès neè bcáè' aè nyoèr, vi bfee vi banïì kúti mbo. Woweèe a wáp seê.	People went out to see what had happened. They came to Jesus, and found the man from whom the demons had gone out, sitting at Jesus' feet, clothed and in his right mind; and they were afraid.
Ñwáè moè' aè byemi yi ená aètaè e ye njáèá buu wááwá, ñwáè ce li rbyemïì li yu wáèni aè ku ce ye yi ba njaèp ce a kap kap.	One man has faith to eat all things, but he who is weak eats only vegetables.
Weèr yu ñgaâa mfaè', a ce faè' aèbee neè Nyúè. Weèe yu ñkúè Nyúè, a ba ndap ce Nyúè aè baè'ri.	For we are God's fellow workers. You are God's farming, God's building.
Tá ñwáè wááwá fyá' yïì ndeèe; yïì ndeèe ka' ba yáánïì, baná ñgaèñ be yu' nyor njobeè' buu bboèñboñ ce e geèe, ke' ba njobeè' e yá ená e geèe buu anaè a caa ñwáè moè' ka'.	But let each man test his own work, and then he will take pride in himself and not in his neighbor.
A mbuèu ce njeñwáè aè ba señ rtaa mbe tuè faè dïì' ntee yi bo yañ bcïìndap Nyúè ka'.	For this cause the woman ought to have authority on her head, because of the angels.
AÈde' Kraâis ba Báèlayaèl a ba cuâu mo'sir aè njáâá ká? AÈde' ñwáè rbyemïì táá kuèu a ñwáè ce e byemi ka' aè njáèá ká?	What agreement has Christ with Belial? Or what portion has a believer with an unbeliever?
Muu mbembep e ke kòŋ mbèʼ sê.	An indiscipline child likes a lot of comparison.
a laa neè ye enáê, “Duè su'si mmir njep túâ Sailoèm (ce yi yu ená, ‘A tuu’).” Nfeèp anaè aè du a su'si mi mmir njep túè anaè. A ka' ce kúti a ce yá buu.	"and said to him, ""Go, wash in the pool of Siloam"" (which means ""Sent""). So he went away, washed, and came back seeing."
E bòŋ à ryuʼ lǎanyʉ̀ nè yoo tùʼ.	It is good to listen to your sermon yourself.
A m laèa neè máè enáê, “AÈ be keèr cep ntuu Nyúè kuu beâe aè bto' jáá jáèá jáá, ce a ce laèa bli jáá jáèá jáá, ker ba bkúú aè bto' anaè.”	"They told me, ""You must prophesy again over many peoples, nations, languages, and kings."""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cena yu wa bláá ce vi kur leâ' fi ce vi be fúú, suèu aètu beèe magoèr.	"He said to them, ""This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many."
Woweèe a bu' mmbo neè ye ená e fa duè ka', a laa neè ye enáê, “Seèe noñ aèfa njobeè' nyúè aè coo, mraèñrañ mi káè' a ce koshi.” Awá e du mbe ndaèp tá a woweèe a bo noèñ mbo.	"They urged him, saying, ""Stay with us, for it is almost evening, and the day is almost over."" He went in to stay with them."
Wèr à jɛ̀r eser Bèŋka a vʉ a baʼ àfa nè njii.	We trekked from Binka to this place in darkness.
ñwáè ce e ce niñ mbe rum yïì embenjïì aè ku ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì. E ke niñ mbo nfeè' moè'sir njep feè'. E niñ wa'a, túr bláá mbú tá e bo ñwañshi aètu yïì buu bbebep ker ba buu bbebep ce beèe a m geèe a riñ ka' naè.	but into the second the high priest alone, once in the year, not without blood, which he offers for himself, and for the errors of the people.
Nyúè aè geèe weèr aè ce yu' rboèñ aè njáèá beèe ce weèe yu seê. Weèr aè rïìñ aèmboè aède' weèr yoñshïì ye ka'.	For what thanksgiving can we render again to God for you, for all the joy with which we rejoice for your sakes before our God;
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M ce suñ wáè neè mini-ñwáè ená a ka' tá bi ñwáè nfeè' baa ka', aède' ñgaèñ yá kúú Nyúè ka'.”	"Jesus answered him, ""Most certainly, I tell you, unless one is born anew, he can't see the Kingdom of God."""
Bkar waê, aè ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, kuushi neè buu ce ñgaâa ntuu Tata Jisos Kraâis a m suñ weèe ená vi be loè koni naè.	But you, beloved, remember the words which have been spoken before by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ñwáè fa kuè loèr njeñwáè ba njo' rboèñ ce a ye a be yu' mbe bkuu, aèmboè beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ke geèe naè ka'.	not in the passion of lust, even as the Gentiles who don't know God;
Woweèe a ka' ce caèa aè mú ñgaèptú' a yá ce fik caè aèmboè yi ku yopri neè mñgaèñ-ñwáè.	As they passed by in the morning, they saw the fig tree withered away from the roots.
Jisoès aè ka' yu' blaèa ca, a bááñger seê, a laa neè beèe ce a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu naè enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená máè be yá ñwáè moè' ce e túr njáèá rbyemïì ca ka', ka' aè to' Isráèl.	"When Jesus heard it, he marveled, and said to those who followed, ""Most certainly I tell you, I haven't found so great a faith, not even in Israel."
Muu waè ce Timotïì, m ce laèa buu ca neè wáè. Buu ce m ce laèa neè wáè na yu buu ce vi ghááte aè buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe aè nfeè' moè', beèe a riñ a laa aèmboè wáè naè. Wáâ ce geèe buu anaè, vi bo fa wáè ñger aè rmaè' bïìr ce mboèñmboñ.	This instruction I commit to you, my child Timothy, according to the prophecies which led the way to you, that by them you may wage the good warfare;
Moo mkuu mi fʉʉ a?	Have your beans germinated.
Ŋgʉp mber ca a yàa.	That red fowl is mine.
E m ce gheèter aè ryá njáèá ñwáè ce Jisoès yu, a yá ye ka' njobeè' e m ba ñwáâ nlúè'shi, kúr beèe a tá'shïì ye.	He was trying to see who Jesus was, and couldn't because of the crowd, because he was short.
Woweèe a m cáp Nyúè embe buèu njo' ñgá' ce woweèe a m ce yá, ker ba njobeè' bkoètá ce vi m koo woweèe naè. Woweèe a m yá ñgá' ca wa'a, a ke' kupse yap ntee borni buu bbebep ce woweèe a m ce geèe ka'.	and they blasphemed the God of heaven because of their pains and their sores. They didn't repent of their works.
Yàp à she foŋ.	Houses got burnt at Wat.
Ŋgɛʼ à naŋ nyàa ce Tàta à ba tʉʉ nà.	Ngeh has seconded Tata for the animal he shot.
Fa tɛr rkìŋ mbe ŋgèp ŋgàa kaʼ.	Donʼt place the pot on the upper frontal surface of the shelf.
Wee aè ka' be' buu ce máè sañ neè weèe na, weèe yá ená yuu ce aède' beèe a riñ kuu Kraâis ka' naè, m rïìñ yi boèñboñ seê.	by which, when you read, you can perceive my understanding in the mystery of Christ;
Ñgaèñ túr aè rba ñwáè ce e ce keè' aè yïì ndap boèñboñ, ker ce yá'ni boo vi tá woweèe a ce yu'ni neè ye, ce geèe ñgeâe boèñboñ neè beèe wááwá.	one who rules his own house well, having children in subjection with all reverence;
Wee weèe foñ aè m yu' aèmboè máè m laèa ená a máè Kraâis naè ka'. M yu ya ba ñwáè ce a tuu ená e du entombïì neè ye.	You yourselves testify that I said, 'I am not the Christ,' but, 'I have been sent before him.'
E ka' laèa wa' wáá, a niñ mbe keñ, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yeâ mbuèu mbo.	When he got into a boat, his disciples followed him.
Jisoès aè natïì a du a yeâ mbuèu a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe.	Jesus got up and followed him, as did his disciples.
E ka' suè'si woweèe mkuèu wáá, a lor vi bcáè' ce e ba co'ni naè a yar, a du a cu aè nsheè. E ka' cu, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Waè' weèe rïìñ yuu ce máè geèe neè weèe na a?	"So when he had washed their feet, put his outer garment back on, and sat down again, he said to them, ""Do you know what I have done to you?"
Woweèe a natïì mbekïì, a fúr yeâ aè rla' a ko' aègho mbe tu rtuèu ce a m baè'ri lap rla' mbo naè, tá a bo maè' ye njep rbar.	They rose up, threw him out of the city, and led him to the brow of the hill that their city was built on, that they might throw him off the cliff.
Weèe ka' riñ ená Kraâis yu ñwáâ nyáánïì, baná weèe túr aè rrïìñ foñ ená ñwáè nsïìp ce e ce geèe buu byáánïì yu muu Nyúè.	If you know that he is righteous, you know that everyone who practices righteousness is born of him.
Wer mnjè a kòŋ wèr sê.	Our elders love us very much.
Weèe rïìñ ncep ce weèr aè m fa neè weèe aè rlii Tata Jisoès naè.	For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Weèe aè be be' yuu ce Dávïìd aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce njeè aè m ce yañ ye ker ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba naè ka' a?	"Jesus, answering them, said, ""Haven't you read what David did when he was hungry, he, and those who were with him;"
Weèr ce laèa wa'a, a ke' ce gheèter ba aè rgeèe tá weèe bo rïìñ ená weèr yu beâe mini ka'. Weèr ce taè' ba ená weèe koni yuu ce aède' weèe yu' rboèñ aègho neè weèr, tá weèe bo túr yuu aè rlaèa neè beèe ce a ce yu' rboèñ neè ñwáè njo' nta' ce ñgaèñ túr, ke' ba ba njo' njáèá ñwáè ce e yu ka'.	For we are not commending ourselves to you again, but speak as giving you occasion of boasting on our behalf, that you may have something to answer those who boast in appearance, and not in heart.
A m súèti nsuñ anaè ese beèe wááwá. AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' e seè'ni, Nyúè aè gee yïì beèe a rïîñ.	the mystery which has been hidden for ages and generations. But now it has been revealed to his saints,
Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi ker laa mbe dïì' mo' enáê, “Woweèe a be keè yá ñwáè ce a m soèp.”	"Again another Scripture says, ""They will look on him whom they pierced."""
Nyúè aè m ká' seèe tá seèe bo ce geèe ba njáèá ñgeâe bebep ca ka'. E m ká' seèe tá seèe bo cu ba rcu rrara.	For God called us not for uncleanness, but in sanctification.
Jisoès aè m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Muu Ñwáè yu Taèr ce e túr mmbomntaa Nyúè.”	"He said to them, ""The Son of Man is lord of the Sabbath."""
M ce laèa neè weèe seè'ni na ená weèe kur ntee. Moè' efa weèe be kwe ka'. Yuu ce yi be bep, saè'ñger, ku ba keñ caè'caè'.	Now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will be no loss of life among you, but only of the ship.
AÈ ka' ba ená e m faèa yuu mo' neè wáè, káè e m ye wáè ba rkaa áè, aè suñ máè tá m la'.	But if he has wronged you at all, or owes you anything, put that to my account.
Bèe magòr a be zhe nca.	Majority of the people will eat fish.
E m cu aè mnoâñ btaar, a yá yuu ka', a ye yuu ka', a no yuu ka'.	He was without sight for three days, and neither ate nor drank.
Bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá a m noèñ a kwaèraè anaè weèe, beèe enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá a no mruè' saèkïì, a ce saèki foñ aèmboè kwaèraè ca.”	"with whom the kings of the earth committed sexual immorality, and those who dwell in the earth were made drunken with the wine of her sexual immorality."""
M ce suñ weèe máná efa beèe wááwá ce bbyeèñge a bi, moè' caèa Joân ka'. Geewa'a, ñwáè ce e yu yi múcaèr se mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè aè caèa ye.”	For I tell you, among those who are born of women there is not a greater prophet than John the Baptizer, yet he who is least in the Kingdom of God is greater than he.
Ñgwañkúñwáè moè' aè m ba aè rla' anaè foñ. E m ku ce vúè ce bu' mbo neè ye, ce laèa enáê, ‘Jaè' máè sa' mnsa' ce weèr yaè ñwáè bbaèa túr na, teni mi yáánïì.’	A widow was in that city, and she often came to him, saying, 'Defend me from my adversary!'
Baná Muu Ñwáè yu Taèr ce e túr mmbomntaa Nyúè.”	"Therefore the Son of Man is lord even of the Sabbath."""
Ndoèo be co' woweèe. Woweèe a ce jáèr ba njep mkuèu Káên. Woweèe a ce geèe buu bbebep tá a bo koni mbaèa aèmboè Balaèm aè m geèe naè. Woweèe a ce kweñger njobeè' woweèe a teèe btu aèmboè Koraè aè m teèe tu a lo a kwe naè.	Woe to them! For they went in the way of Cain, and ran riotously in the error of Balaam for hire, and perished in Korah's rebellion.
Gwàr nè waanda tɛ e kaʼ teti jòr.	Cut with the machete so that it can cut quickly.
Máè rïìñ ye ñgeèe. Máè rïìñ máná ka' weèe túr ñger goèr ka' wa'a, weèe aè yu' wa blaèa. Weèe aè m be máñni máè aè nfeè' moè' ka'. Yáê, máè múè' keèñ neè weèe, ñwáè moè' aè ba ce aède' e ker cete ka'.	"I know your works (behold, I have set before you an open door, which no one can shut), that you have a little power, and kept my word, and didn't deny my name.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	9	Yá yuu ce m be geèe neè beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Sataèn a ce nya' mnde' ená woweèe a yu Jus naè. M be geèe tá woweèe a vú gú'shi njep weâe tïìi, yu'ni neè weèe, tá woweèe a bo rïìñ ená máè koèñ weèe.	Behold, I give of the synagogue of Satan, of those who say they are Jews, and they are not, but lie. Behold, I will make them to come and worship before your feet, and to know that I have loved you.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	10	Weèe aè yu' wa blaèa a kur ntee, a táá tatap, baná m be keè'ni weèe aè nfeè' ce ñgá' be vúè njep ñgoèñ na moèoshi beèe wááwá naè, tá ñgá' anaè bo joèo weèe ka'.	Because you kept my command to endure, I also will keep you from the hour of testing, which is to come on the whole world, to test those who dwell on the earth.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	11	Ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá m vúê. Táá neè tatap njep le rbyemïì faè dïì' ñwáè moè' lo koo wee blaè' ese weèe ka'.	I am coming quickly! Hold firmly that which you have, so that no one takes your crown.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	12	Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap, caa rmoèoshïì baná m be geèe tá ñgaèñ ba aèmboè rkïì wa'a, mbe ndap yaè Taê. E be ba aèmboè rkïì ce li be táá mbo nfeseè. M be sañ rlii yaè Nyúè keèr sañ rlii dïì' ce Nyúè e ke cu ce a too ená Jáèrusaláèm ce nfi naè a yeâ nyoèr. Jáèrusaláèm ca yu ba yïì ce e be loè ba ese Nyúè embe buèu. M be sañ la rlii rfi a yeâ nyoèr foñ.	He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will go out from there no more. I will write on him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and my own new name.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	13	Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	3	14	Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese ñwáè ce a too ená AÈmáèn. E yu ñwáè mini ce e ke suñ buu ce vi yu mini aèmboè Nyúè. Nyúè aè m geèe buu wááwá aè loè ese ye.	To the angel of the assembly in Laodicea write: ""The Amen, the Faithful and True Witness, the Head of God's creation, says these things:"
Rïìtu yi ce koo máè neè Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca ka'. Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca yu ñger Nyúè ce yi geèe beèe ce a byemi a luêñ. Ca yi yu entombïì neè Juês, a ka' ba foñ neè beèe enje jáá.	For I am not ashamed of the Good News of Christ, for it is the power of God for salvation for everyone who believes; for the Jew first, and also for the Greek.
A mbuèu ce weâe ke laè' mbaâa baèraè' foñ, njobeè' beèe ce a ce kuèu mbaâa baèraè' a ce faè' ba neè Nyúè.	For this reason you also pay taxes, for they are servants of God's service, attending continually on this very thing.
E m geèe mnjáèá wááwá vi fúú enjep ñwáè moè'sir, tá vi bo cu aè bdïì' wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na. E m kwaè'shi wáá, a lá mnfeè', a ker lá bdïì' rcu neè woweèe.	He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons, and the boundaries of their dwellings,
E ker laa enáê, “Wáâ Tataê, aè m ba efa rkáè', wáè gee ñgoèñ ba buu embe buèu wááwá neè mo mmbo.	"And, ""You, Lord, in the beginning, laid the foundation of the earth. The heavens are the works of your hands."
Lu'shi neè weèe beèe ce a ce lu'shi, koosimnse weèe beèe ce a ce koosimnse.	Rejoice with those who rejoice. Weep with those who weep.
E ka' keè' woweèe a ce kwaè'shi ená woweèe a be fa ye yuu.	He listened to them, expecting to receive something from them.
Nyáèá e ke vúè tá e bo yáèá, yú, keèr bepsi buu. Máè vúè ya tá beèe a bo koni ryoèñ, túr buu wááwá.	The thief only comes to steal, kill, and destroy. I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly.
A mbuèu ce a m kur leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye a beèe aè nfeè' entombïì naè ba neè bláá.	Therefore even the first covenant has not been dedicated without blood.
Wèr à gèe rfàʼ ba nyʉ̀lʉ̀ʼ.	We did the work on a none-market-day.
Máè byemi ená njeñwáè yá'ni káè túr ñger mbenduè mbañruèñwáè ka'. Njeñwáè túr aè rcu múnyañ.	But I don't permit a woman to teach, nor to exercise authority over a man, but to be in quietness.
E m cu a ce keè' nfeè' ce kúú Nyúè yi be káè'. E m byemi yuu ce a m geèe neè Jisoès na ka'.	(he had not consented to their counsel and deed), from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who was also waiting for the Kingdom of God:
Yu' neè seè'ni, weèe ce weèe cu ce kaè' buu ce weèe be geèe, ce laèa enáê, “Weèr be loè ntïìni, buwa'laèr weèr lo aèyaèñseè duè cu aè to' mo' aèmboè feè', tá weèr bo geèe ntaa, koni mbaèa.”	"Come now, you who say, ""Today or tomorrow let's go into this city, and spend a year there, trade, and make a profit."""
Bkar waê, weèr ce báá weèe wa'a a ku riñ werná weèe ce jáèr ba njep nduunjïû yáánïì, a ce luèñ.	But, beloved, we are persuaded of better things for you, and things that accompany salvation, even though we speak like this.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Vúè neè yá.” Woweèe a du a yá faèdïì' e m ce cu, a cu a Jisoès weèe, ká' embe nfeè' nyúè aè m káè' a ce coo.	"He said to them, ""Come, and see."" They came and saw where he was staying, and they stayed with him that day. It was about the tenth hour."
AÈmboè yi yu na baná ñwáè moè' fa keèr kuèu ñguèñ njo' ñwáè moè' ka'. Buu wááwá yu yeè buu.	Therefore let no one boast in men. For all things are yours,
Ku' beèe a ka' vúè goèr, e laa neè woweèe enáê, “Ñgúè beèe ca yu ñgúè bsaèrbuu. Woweèe a ce roèo ená a duñshi woweèe ncoèo, geewa'a, a be duèñshi woweèe ncoèo moè' caèa efa yïì Jonaè ka'.	"When the multitudes were gathering together to him, he began to say, ""This is an evil generation. It seeks after a sign. No sign will be given to it but the sign of Jonah, the prophet."
Fa maè'shi tá yuu bebep yi so wáè ka'; so yuu bebep neè yuu boèñboñ.	Don't be overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good.
Woweèe a ma'shïì ku' beèe ce a woweèe aè m ba naè, a niñ mbe keñ ce Jisoès aè m ba mbo, a woweèe a ce tuu. Bkeñ mo' vi m ce tuu foñ.	Leaving the multitude, they took him with them, even as he was, in the boat. Other small boats were also with him.
Ñwáè fii anaè ce a m ce too aè li Greâk ená Álemaès, aè jepsïì woweèe, a koñ ená govanoè byemi blaèa ce woweèe a m feè'shi aèmboè Jisoès naè ka'.	But Elymas the sorcerer (for so is his name by interpretation) withstood them, seeking to turn aside the proconsul from the faith.
A mbuèu ce beèe magoèr a weâe mú a sáè, beèe mo' a ce yañ, beèe mo' a kweñgeèr.	For this cause many among you are weak and sickly, and not a few sleep.
Awá ncïìndap Nyúè embe buèu aè yáátïì, a fa ye ñger.	An angel from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
Lòr tu cɛ̀ʼ anà sìp vʉ àgho.	Take that piece of cloth as a whole and bring along.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba aèfo ce e m yañ aè bfeè' ncoèp-waami-aè-mntaar.	A certain man was there, who had been sick for thirty-eight years.
Woweèe a ka' yá aèmboè li táá, a lu'shi magoèr seê.	When they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
Abraèham ye ye aè lor buu ce e m koo aè ñkúè bïìr a gap bdïì' rúêú, a lor dïû' mo'sir a fa neè Máèlkisidáèk. Mbuèu efa rlii Máèlkisidáèk ca yu enáê, “Ñkúú ce e ke geèe ñgeâe yáánïì.” Mbuèu efa rlii yi to' yu enáê, “Cumúnyañ” Baná li rlii li yu foñ enáê, “Ñkúú cumúnyañ”	to whom also Abraham divided a tenth part of all (being first, by interpretation, king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace;
Ñwáè nsañ ñwaè' ce aè rla' ca aè gee beèe wááwá a cu nyañ, e laa enáê, “Yaè beâe aè rla' Áfásoès, ñwáè wááwá riñ ená rla' Áfásoès a rla' ce li ke keè'ni ndap nyúè AÈtámïìs ce yu nyúâ ñgoèr, a ker ba rla' ce li ke keè'ni yuu ce yi m gweè embe buèu naè.	"When the town clerk had quieted the multitude, he said, ""You men of Ephesus, what man is there who doesn't know that the city of the Ephesians is temple keeper of the great goddess Artemis, and of the image which fell down from Zeus?"
Beèe a ka' ce buumi, yïì ñwáè bbaèa aè vú a bye ñke' aè múè msañ ce ñgaèñ aè m byeè, a du yi yu.	but while people slept, his enemy came and sowed darnel weeds also among the wheat, and went away.
Kèti bàa nje ŋgʉʼndap.	Hang the bag on the wall.
Yaŋ zhi gèe mɛ̀ kuu ce bèeŋger ba mbena.	Sickness has made me to be loitering only around here.
Fa cɛ̀ʼ yaa nè ye.	Give my dress to him.
Weèe aè byemi Jisos Kraâis aèmboè ye Tataê, baná weèe ce gee ba ñgeèe ce beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Jisos Kraâis a ba ce geèe.	As therefore you received Christ Jesus, the Lord, walk in him,
E m ker kúti a tuu rdip Jodaèn a du faèdïì' ce Joân aè m ce baèptir beèe naè, a cu aèfo.	He went away again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was baptizing at first, and there he stayed.
Wěr ke no mdip nfèʼwɛɛwɛ.	We drink water every time.
A koo ye a yú, a fúr embe múè nsuu, a ma' njepmbeè.	They took him, killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard.
Ñwáè aè ka' ku ce geèe ba buu bbebep wa'a, baná ñgaèñ aè ba káè' ce wáp njobeè' e be gweè mnsa' Nyúè. Ma njáèá mor mo' yi yu ce yi be keè yáèr beèe wááwá ce a teèe tuè neè Nyúè.	but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and a fierceness of fire which will devour the adversaries.
Jus mo' ce a m ce kar ce juèu byú' bbebep enjep beèe, a ká' a ce yoèñ rlii Tata Jisoès mbenduè beèe ce byú' bbebep vi m ba njep woweèe. Woweèe a m ce laèa enáê, “AÈ rlii Jisoès ce Pol e ke feè'shi naè, fúú neè duê.”	"But some of the itinerant Jews, exorcists, took on themselves to invoke over those who had the evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, ""We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul preaches."""
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Wáè geèe wá ká a ka' ce yá buu?”	"They therefore were asking him, ""How were your eyes opened?"""
E m ce feè'shi aèmboè kúú Nyúè, a ce yá'ni beèe buu kuu Tata Jisos Kraêis. E m geèe wa'a neè ñger-ñwáè, ñwáè aè ce jepsi ye ka'.	preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance.
keèr geèe tá buu ce woweèe a m ce súèti njep ntee naè vi yááti aèwañ, tá woweèe a gú'shi, yoèñshi Nyúè, laèa neè yap cuèu enáê, “Nyúè yu a weâe mú neè mini-ñwáè.”	And thus the secrets of his heart are revealed. So he will fall down on his face and worship God, declaring that God is among you indeed.
Mboè weèe rïìñ ená seèe be keè sa' bcïìndap Nyúè a? Yi ka' ba wa'a, yi ka' ba eká aèmboè buu ce vi kuèu liseèe rcu enjep ñgoèñ.	Don't you know that we will judge angels? How much more, things that pertain to this life?
Pailáèt aè ker laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yuu bebep ce ñwáè ca aè geèe seeseê, yu ba ká? Máè yá yuu mo' ce e geèe ce aède' a yú ye aètu mo ka'. Baná a be lïìp ye tá m ma'shi ye.”	"He said to them the third time, ""Why? What evil has this man done? I have found no capital crime in him. I will therefore chastise him and release him."""
Pol aè fúú efa waâp mú, a duê.	Thus Paul went out from among them.
Waè' aède' mdip mmboèñmboñ mi fúú embe dïû' mo'sir a mdip mmbembep a?	Does a spring send out from the same opening fresh and bitter water?
Mboâñtu mi yu neè weèe ce beèe a ka' baa weèe, beesi njïì neè weèe, cáp weèe, bepsi me mlii njobeè' Muu Ñwáè.	Blessed are you when men shall hate you, and when they shall exclude and mock you, and throw out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake.
Yi ba ba mini ená beèe ce a kweñger a be fúú efa rkwe ka', a ka' ce baèptir beèe aètu beèe ce a m kweñger njoká?	Or else what will they do who are baptized for the dead? If the dead aren't raised at all, why then are they baptized for the dead?
Máè m kwaè'shi máná m be ce duè aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè tá m caa caè'ni weèe má ce kúti, ker ca'ni weèe, tá weèe bo maè'shi máè tá m du aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.	and by you to pass into Macedonia, and again from Macedonia to come to you, and to be sent forward by you on my journey to Judea.
M ce koèñ aè rsuñ weèe ená weèe yu bfúr, baná weèe koñni.	Let brotherly love continue.
Caŋ sʉŋ mbà rìŋ.	Run and hide in the bush.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa enáê, “Tataê, yáê, a bkaèafaâ' bbaa na.” E beesïì enáê, “Vi gháá wa'a.”	"They said, ""Lord, behold, here are two swords."" He said to them, ""That is enough."""
M ce sañ neè weèe boo waê, njobeè' weèe rïìñ Taèr. M ce sañ neè weâe btaèr njobeè' weèe rïìñ ñwáè ce e m ba efa rkáè'. M ce sañ neè weâe mnsuènsuè njobeè' weèe yu btatap, nlaèa Nyúè yi niñ weèe njep bláá, weèe aè so Sataèn.	I have written to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I have written to you, young men, because you are strong, and the word of God remains in you, and you have overcome the evil one.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Njeñwáè, aè ce laèa ba neè máè njoká? Nfeè' yaè aè be gháá ka'.”	"Jesus said to her, ""Woman, what does that have to do with you and me? My hour has not yet come."""
Nfúr moè' káè njaèr moè' ka' buu bcáè' ce e yar, ker buu byee ce e ye,	And if a brother or sister is naked and in lack of daily food,
Yu Nyúè ce e ce faè' njep weâe mntee, a ce geèe ená weèe koñ aè rgeèe yuu ce e ce roèo, aè ker ba ye ce e ce fa weèe ñger aè rgeèe yuu anaè.	For it is God who works in you both to will and to work, for his good pleasure.
E cu tàtà sê.	He has stayed for so long.
Beèe ce a m ce caèa yap caèa, a kor btu, a su' ye neè mcáp,	Those who passed by blasphemed him, wagging their heads,
Ka' yi yu wa'a, máè túr ñger aè rlaèa ená ñwáè cu a máâ bo maè' káè a máâ bo ñkoèp ka'. Bdïì' anaè vi yu ba neè beèe ce Nyúè aè kupshi a lá neè woweèe.”	"but to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared."""
Ndò fa coʼ wɛ̀ kaʼ.	Donʼt be a victim.
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “AÈde' aè ke' su'si ma mkuèu ka'.” Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “M ka' tá suè'si mo mkuèu ka', baná soè aè mïì.”	"Peter said to him, ""You will never wash my feet!"" Jesus answered him, ""If I don't wash you, you have no part with me."""
Ŋkuŋku zhi m gèe rìtu a jorne.	The fern felt ashame and became tired.
Mutù à tàŋte njep ncàʼ.	The vehicle got stuck in the mud.
ŋgùŋ2 [ŋgȕŋ] n 1a.	shrub whose stem is sliced and used to make baskets and mats.
Nlaèa ca yu nlaâa mini. M ce koèñ ená aè laa buu ca tatap seê, tá beèe ce a byemi neè Nyúè a bo loèr nfeè' ce geèe ba buu bboèñboñ. Buu ca vi yu byáánïì, sá' aè ba njo neè ñwáè wááwá.	This saying is faithful, and concerning these things I desire that you affirm confidently, so that those who have believed God may be careful to maintain good works. These things are good and profitable to men;
Weèr aè m yá buu wááwá ce e m geèe aè bbu' mla' aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm neè mer mmir. Woweèe a m yú ye, a m káèti ye ba mbe ce, e kweê.	We are witnesses of everything he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem; whom they also killed, hanging him on a tree.
Loèr neè nfeè', buwa'laèr weèe lo fa nyor aè buu bcicïì, ba buu mno ba buu ce mluè mi ke koo beèe aègho njep ñgoèñ na, tá noèñ anaè yi lo búèú weèe búèú aèmboè taa yi búèú nyaèa wa'a.	"So be careful, or your hearts will be loaded down with carousing, drunkenness, and cares of this life, and that day will come on you suddenly.
Luke	Luêk	21	35	Noèñ anaè yi be keè ba neè beèe wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na.	For it will come like a snare on all those who dwell on the surface of all the earth.
Luke	Luêk	21	36	Ce ke'ni neè aè nfeè' wááwá, ce loo ená Nyúè fa weèe ñger, buu ca vi loè koni bo joèo weèe ka', tá weèe bo táá njeptii Muu Ñwáè.”	Therefore be watchful all the time, praying that you may be counted worthy to escape all these things that will happen, and to stand before the Son of Man."
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè ka' du niñ ka' mbe ndaèp yïû fá áè, weèe ku cu ba mbo caar, ba' aè nfeè' ce weèe be fúú efa rla' anaè.	"He said to them, ""Wherever you enter into a house, stay there until you depart from there."
Beèe magoèr a ce cúèúni aèmboè ye. Beèe mo' a ce laèa enáê, “E yu ñwáâ mboèñmboñ.” Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “AÈi', e ce bo' beèe bo'.”	"There was much murmuring among the multitudes concerning him. Some said, ""He is a good man."" Others said, ""Not so, but he leads the multitude astray."""
Ŋwɛɛ Nsʉsi Bkwâa [ŋwɛ̄ː nsɨ̄sī bkwâː] cn 7.	month of May.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, a ka' ce sa' máè, káè ce sa' weèe áè, káè ce sa' ba kor áè, m lor ya yu yïì anaè aè yuu ka'. Ka' máè foñ, máâ ke sa' ya tu ka'.	But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged by you, or by man's judgment. Yes, I don't judge my own self.
AÈmboè weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe yu ñwáè moè'sir seè'ni na, e geèe weèe beèe ca weèe aè ba aèbee aèmboè ndap ce a baè'ri wa'a, tá Yú' Nyúè yi bo cu mbo.	in whom you also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit.
Wɛ̀ kaʼ yɛ cǔumbuʼ, laa enɛ còŋ, banɛ zhi be lìp wɛ̀ kaʼ.	If you see a ʼchuumbuʼ juju and say “peace” it will not beat you.
doc ŋòʼshi njàp tɛ à bo zhe baa yuʼu.	When you eat fufu, you will economise the soup so that you may eat and be satisfied.
E tʉʉ mɛ̀ nè dʉ̀ʼ.	He has punched me with a fist.
M ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe gee tá ñgaèñ riñ ená weèe ku bii koèñ ye.	Therefore I beg you to confirm your love toward him.
Yèr ndap à ba she, mɛ̀ nyaŋnyàŋ, a keʼ lor yuu kaʼ.	Our house was burning, I ran around in confusion and did not take anything.
Jisoès aè ka' loè kúti aè rla' Kaèpanuèm, beèe a yu' ená e kúti.	When he entered again into Capernaum after some days, it was heard that he was in the house.
Jaè' byepkúú ce a yu byepkúú neè mini-ñwáè.	Honor widows who are widows indeed.
Woweèe a ka' ce suèu embe rtuèu, Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe fa suñ ñwáè moè' yuu ce weèe aè yá ka' caar tá Muu Ñwáè ke fúú efa rkwe.”	"As they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, ""Don't tell anyone what you saw, until the Son of Man has risen from the dead."""
Bfee ce vi vúè ba ese Nyúè vi ke geèe ñwáè, e ce geèe ñgeâe rara. Vi ke geèe ñwáè, e cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè, ba neè rbonïì-ñwáè, ker túr ntee aè ryu' yuu ce beèe mo' a ce laèa. Vi ke geèe ñwáè, e túr ñkoosimnse ker ce geèe buu bboèñboñ. Vi ke geèe ñwáè e ce so'niñgoèñ ka', ke' ce bo' beèe ka'.	But the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceful, gentle, reasonable, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy.
Wèr be tii yuʼ yuu ce e mʉ lâa.	We will find out and hear what he said.
Zhìi maa à laa baa.	Her mother has cooked food.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Pitaè aè m vúè aè rla' Antïìyoèk, máè lapnïì ye aè múè beèe njobeè' e m geèe faèa.	But when Peter came to Antioch, I resisted him to his face, because he stood condemned.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba mbo ce li rkoo mo' li m kwe. Beèe mo' ce a m ba mbo a bipshïì neè Jisoès enáê, “Waè' ncir yi byemi ená a gee tá ñwáè ke'se nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè a?” Woweèe a m bipshi wa'a ená e ka' faa nlaèa tá woweèe a bo sa' ye ená e bú' ncir.	"And behold there was a man with a withered hand. They asked him, ""Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day?"" that they might accuse him."
Woowèe a ba laa nè yap cùu enɛ a be fʉʉ vʉ̀.	They themselves said that they would come.
Kuushi beèe ená woweèe a yu'ni neè beèe ce a ce sa' woweèe ba beèe ce a yu btu mnta' neè woweèe. Woweèe a yu'ni neè beèe ca ker tami nyor aè rgeèe njáèá rfaè' ce li ka' ba yáánïì.	Remind them to be in subjection to rulers and to authorities, to be obedient, to be ready for every good work,
Nyúè aè geèe yuu ce mncir vi túr ñger aè rgeèe ka', njobeè' ñwáè aè moèo aè rláè mncir laèr. E m tuu muu yïì, e beeñgeèr aè ñwáè aèmboè seèe ce seèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, tá e bo geèe tá buu bbebep mïî. A mboè e m so buu bbebep enjep seâe mntee aè njáâá wa'a.	For what the law couldn't do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God did, sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh;
“Weèe aè yu' ená a m laèa neè beèe eluâuñgoèñ enáê, ‘Fa yú ka', ñwáè ce e ka' yú ñwáè baná a be loèr ye aè mnsa'.’	"You have heard that it was said to the ancient ones, 'You shall not murder;' and 'Whoever shall murder shall be in danger of the judgment.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	22	M ce laèa ya neè weèe máná ntee yi ka' yañ ñwáè neè nfúr yïì, baná a be loèr ñgaèñ aè mnsa'. Ñwáè ce e ka' laa neè nfúr yïì enáê, ‘AÈ yu yuu cicïì’ baná a be loèr ñgaèñ aè mnsa'. Ñwáè ce e ka' laa neè ñwáè enáê, ‘AÈ yu lúr’, baná aède' ñgaèñ ke du njep dïû' ñgá' ce mor yi yu njo.	But I tell you, that everyone who is angry with his brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment; and whoever shall say to his brother, 'Raca!' shall be in danger of the council; and whoever shall say, 'You fool!' shall be in danger of the fire of Gehenna.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	5	23	Baná wáè ka' ce duè neè rfa mbe dïû' ntoèo rfa, kuushi ená nfúroè túr wáè aè ntee bebep,	If therefore you are offering your gift at the altar, and there remember that your brother has anything against you,"
E natïì mbekïì, a du aè laè'.	He arose and departed to his house.
Jisoès aè laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ká? AÈde' m be'nïì yi aè káâ naè?	"He said, ""What is the Kingdom of God like? To what shall I compare it?"
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Vúè neè fa máâ mbuèu, tá m gee weèe tá weèe ba ñgaâa ñkoo nca ce be ba ba beèe.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Come after me, and I will make you into fishers for men."""
E lor Pitaè ba boo Sábáèdi a baa, a du a woweèe. E m káè' a ce señ buu, mluè mi ce koo ye seê,	He took with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and severely troubled.
Baná seèe fa keèr sa' viseèe mnyor ka'. Yuu ce weèe aè ba geèe yi yu ená weèe kani ená weèe be keè geèe yuu mo' ce aède' yi gee nfúr yeè moè' kote káè gwe ka'.	Therefore let's not judge one another any more, but judge this rather, that no man put a stumbling block in his brother's way, or an occasion for falling.
Ncïìndap Nyúè ca aè m ku fe' aèmboè beèe a m ce feè'. E m feè' bsaèp embekïì efa ñka' anaè vi ba mmátaè ncoèp-ta-aè-msaèambaê.	Its wall is one hundred forty-four cubits, by the measure of a man, that is, of an angel.
Yi yu mini wa'a. A m faèrshi woweèe njobeè' woweèe a m byemi ka'. Weèe yu ñgúè' moè' efa ce anaè njo' le rbyemïì caè'caè'. Baná weèe fa naèa tu ka', weèe lor nfeè'.	True; by their unbelief they were broken off, and you stand by your faith. Don't be conceited, but fear;
“Habai, Jisoâs aè rla' Nasaráèt, yuu ce aè ce roèo ese weèr yu ba ká? Wáè vúè aè ryúshi weèr a? M rïìñ njáèá ñwáè ce aè yu, aè yu ñwáâ nrara ce e loè ese Nyúè.”	"saying, ""Ah! what have we to do with you, Jesus of Nazareth? Have you come to destroy us? I know you who you are: the Holy One of God!"""
E ka' yá'ni mïìsi, a laa neè Saimúèn enáê, “Doèo neè keñ du aègho mbe dïì' ce yi coomi, ma' me mraa njep roè, koo nca.”	"When he had finished speaking, he said to Simon, ""Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for a catch."""
Tʉ̀ʼshi tɛ sò cu.	Shift a bit so that we can sit.
Ñwáè aè ka' koñ nfúr yïì, e ker gee yu bebep neè ye ka'. Ñwáè aè ka' koñ ñwáè baná e láè mncir wááwá.	Love doesn't harm a neighbor. Love therefore is the fulfillment of the law.
Wèr ye à kupse mntaʼ.	We have exchanged seats.
Jisoès aè lapnïì yú' anaè enáê, “Cu nyañ! Fúú enjep ye!”	"Jesus rebuked him, saying, ""Be quiet, and come out of him!"""
Weèe aè ka' foosi ñwáè, baná máè foèosi ye foñ. Yi ka' ba ená ñwáè aè geèe yuu ce m foosi ye, m foosïì ye aè bsii Kraâis njo' weèe,	Now I also forgive whomever you forgive anything. For if indeed I have forgiven anything, I have forgiven that one for your sakes in the presence of Christ,
Beèe ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii yu beèe ce a ce yu' mncir ba neè btuè' caè'caè' ka', yu beèe ce a ce láè mncir.	For it isn't the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law will be justified
Baná weèe lor blaèa ca, gee tá mntee beèe efa weâe mú vi fúte.	Therefore comfort one another with these words.
Mo' foñ yi yu ená aè láè ntee neè Tata Jisoès, tá ntee ce wáè láè anaè yi ba aèmboè byáá bïìr, tá mjáá Sataèn ce mor yi yu aè cuèu mo mi bo koo njo.	above all, taking up the shield of faith, with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one.
E be toʼsi yuu ce e ba laa nà.	He will release what he said.
Woweèe a fa cwaèr mmbo ka'. Woweèe a fa' neè wap mmasaè neè ntee mo'sir aè nfeè' wááwá tá yap ñgeèe yi bo geèe tá beèe a vúse buu ce seèe ce yá'ni aèmboè Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe ñwáè rjaè'.	not stealing, but showing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God, our Savior, in all things.
Ñgaâa rbyemïì ca wááwá a m ku túr nteâe mo'sir ba rkwaè'shïû rmo'sir. Ñwáè moè' aè ke' ce laèa ená buu ce e túr ku ba vi caè'caè' ka'. Woweèe a m ku túr yaèp buu aèbee.	The multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. Not one of them claimed that anything of the things which he possessed was his own, but they had all things in common.
“Beèe a ba kwaè'shi aèmboè buu ca boèñboñ se neè bfee-ñwáè. Btu saèamba ca yu mtuèu saèamba ce njeñwáè ca cu mbenduè mo. Btu anaè vi táá aètu bkúú saèambaê.	Here is the mind that has wisdom. The seven heads are seven mountains, on which the woman sits.
Seèe aè ka' ba aèbee seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè li rkwe, baná seèe be keè ba aèbee seèe woweèe, fúú efa rkwe aèmboè e m fúú naè.	For if we have become united with him in the likeness of his death, we will also be part of his resurrection;
Bsoogáè a fa ntañ ená a be yúshi ñgaâa shañ ce a m ba mbe keñ anaè wááwá faè dïì' moè' efa woweèe bo coo njep roè bu' rdip, fúú nje waa ñkúè cañ ka'.	The soldiers' counsel was to kill the prisoners, so that none of them would swim out and escape.
Beèe mo' a m vúè neè bghaèrbeèe ená Jisoès bo la' mmbo mbe waâp nduè, loo neè woweèe. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a lapnïì beèe anaè.	Then little children were brought to him, that he should lay his hands on them and pray; and the disciples rebuked them.
Jisoès aè ker la' ye mmbo nje mmïìr, e tuñsïì mmir, a misi a yá buu seè'ni boèñboñ.	Then again he laid his hands on his eyes. He looked intently, and was restored, and saw everyone clearly.
Muu Nfò cipbtù sê.	Nforʼs child is very stubborn.
Mɛ̀ mʉ yuu yàa làŋlàŋ enje Nàjeryà.	I bought my traditional cloth from Nigeria.
Seèe yu bo rfaâ' Nyúè. E geèe seèe Jisos Kraâis weèe aè ba aèbee tá seèe bo geèe mfaâ' mmboèñmboñ ce Nyúè aè m láè ená seèe geêe.	For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God prepared before that we would walk in them.
aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Mncir Tata enáê, “A be fa boo rñgoèo ce yu boo mmbañruè wááwá neè Nyúè.”	"(as it is written in the law of the Lord, ""Every male who opens the womb shall be called holy to the Lord""),"
njobeè' ñkaraè moè' ce e ce caèa caèa a niñ máè, máè túr yuu ce m tar ye aègho ka',’	for a friend of mine has come to me from a journey, and I have nothing to set before him,'
Njeñwáè ka' kani aè rseñ rtaa mbe tuè baná e ba boèñlaèr koo tu anaè koo. AÈ ka' ba ená yu rïìtu neè njeñwáè aè rkwaèa tu káè koo tu áè, baná njeñwáè señ rtaa mbe tuè.	For if a woman is not covered, let her also be shorn. But if it is shameful for a woman to be shorn or shaved, let her be covered.
E m duè aè yú', a du a fe'shi Nlaèa Nyúè neè byú' ce vi m ba mbe shañ,	in which he also went and preached to the spirits in prison,
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “Yi yu ba ená ñwáè ca káè yïì ta ba yïì ma a m geèe buu bbebep ka'. A m bi ye e ku ba nfeèp tá beèe a bo yá rfaè' Nyúè njep yuu ce a be geèe neè ye.	"Jesus answered, ""Neither did this man sin, nor his parents; but, that the works of God might be revealed in him."
Boo ce a bi ba aèmboè a ke bi boo naè ka'. Yu ba boo ce a bi ba aèmboè Nyúè koèñ.	who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God.
Njeèndoñ anaè aè laa neè ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m túr rsoèñ naè enáê, “Baè'shi neè bcïìndap bbebep ce a m kur a lá aèwaâa roè ce a too ená Yufrátïìs naè efa bkúè.”	"saying to the sixth angel who had one trumpet, ""Free the four angels who are bound at the great river Euphrates!"""
E lor bsoogáè mo' ba btu mo' a woweèe a cañ a du a yá ku' kúr beèe anaè. Woweèe a ka' yá a bsoogáè weèe, a borni efa rlïìp Poêl.	Immediately he took soldiers and centurions, and ran down to them. They, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul.
Tu yïû goèr yi du a yá Poêl, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Suñ ka máè láê, aè yu ñwáè Rum a?” E beesïì ená áèno.	"The commanding officer came and asked him, ""Tell me, are you a Roman?"" He said, ""Yes."""
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘A be too yaè ndap ená ndap rloo.’ Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè geèe yaè ndap aè kútïì ba aè mbúè' byáèá.”	"He said to them, ""It is written, 'My house shall be called a house of prayer,' but you have made it a den of robbers!"""
Jus a laa enáê, “E laèa ená e ce duè faèdïì' ce aède' seèe vú ka' wa'a, baná e be yú yïì nyor a?”	"The Jews therefore said, ""Will he kill himself, that he says, 'Where I am going, you can't come?'"""
Nyúè ce e ká' weèe, yu ñwáâ mini. E be geèe tá yi ba wa'a.	He who calls you is faithful, who will also do it.
Woweèe a ke kur mntáèr ce vi ce rïìr seê, lá mbe mkáâámbáè' beèe, ke' koñ aè rnaèa ntubo jaè' woweèe aègho ka'.	For they bind heavy burdens that are grievous to be borne, and lay them on men's shoulders; but they themselves will not lift a finger to help them.
Bàràʼ à m kɛ̀ʼ a vʉ àfa bèe a ce wɛp woowèe sê.	When civilised people first came here many people were afraid of them.
Woweèe a m vúè neè jaèaki', ba muu, a co'ni bcáè' a laashi mbenduè mo, Jisoès aè ko' a cu mbo.	and brought the donkey and the colt, and laid their clothes on them; and he sat on them.
Ku' beèe magoèr a m ce duè a yeâ mbuèu. Bbyeèñge a m ba a waâp mú, a ce koosimnse a ce warse njo' ñgá' ce Jisoès aè m ce yá.	A great multitude of the people followed him, including women who also mourned and lamented him.
Pailáèt aè m koèñ aè rgeèe tá nyor boñ kúr beèe anaè. E fúr Baèrabaès embe shañ a fa neè woweèe, a laa ená a lip Jisoès. A ka' lïìp ye neè byáánsoè wáá, a fa ye tá a bo duè taa mbe kïìntaa.	Pilate, wishing to please the multitude, released Barabbas to them, and handed over Jesus, when he had flogged him, to be crucified.
Lávïì aè natïì, a ma'shi yïì buu wááwá, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	He left everything, and rose up and followed him.
Túè' aè ka' raa, beèe ce a m ce sa' to' ba bleebeèe, ker ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a vúseè aèbee aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	It happened in the morning, that their rulers, elders, and scribes were gathered together in Jerusalem.
Weèe aè ka' táá tatap baná weèe be so me myoèñ.	"By your endurance you will win your lives.
Luke	Luêk	21	20	“Weèe aè ka' yá aèmboè bsoogáè a sïìr Jáèrusaláèm a fa mbetar, weèe riñ weená nfeè' ce a be saè'si rla' anaè ce gháá.	But when you see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that its desolation is at hand."
Wɛ̀ bèeŋger efa dìʼ ce wɛ̀ mʉ du a?	Have you returned from where you went?
Ñwáè ce e m ba nyáèá borni byáèá, ce fa' neè mi mmbo aè njïû yáánïì, tá e bo koni yuu ce aède' e ja' ñgaâa fuèp aègho.	Let him who stole steal no more; but rather let him labor, working with his hands the thing that is good, that he may have something to give to him who has need.
Ñwáè ce li rbyemïì li ka' ba wáèni, weèe koo ñgaèñ a weâe mú. Weèe ñwáè anaè weèe fa sár ba mnsár aèmboè yuu ce e byemi ená e ba geèe ka'.	Now accept one who is weak in faith, but not for disputes over opinions.
a co'ni ye bcáè' efa nyoèr, a lor cáâ' beer a yarsi ye aè nyoèr,	They stripped him, and put a scarlet robe on him.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ká' a ce keè'ni neè mmir, a ce tarni ñwáè ce Jisoès aè m ce laèa.	The disciples looked at one another, perplexed about whom he spoke.
Nsuŋ anà ku bii àbbìi.	That information is still a secret.
Bfúr waê, aède' mmbïì mi yú mbe ce fer a? AÈde' fer yi yú mbe rtáá a? Yi yu foñ ená aède' aè tu' mdip mmboèñmboñ enjep dïì' ce mdip mgwañ mi ce fúú ka'.	Can a fig tree, my brothers, yield olives, or a vine figs? Thus no spring yields both salt water and fresh water.
Jisoès aè ka' yu' ntuu ca a laa enáê, “Yañ ca yi be lúèsi ba neè rkwe ka'. Cena yi yu wa'a tá beèe magoèr a bo yá bkuè' Nyúè tá a bo kuè'si Muu Nyúè njobeè' yi.”	"But when Jesus heard it, he said, ""This sickness is not to death, but for the glory of God, that God's Son may be glorified by it."""
E m ce laèa mbo wa'a, a ce laèa ba ená Nyúè e ke yu' rboèñ neè btañshïì ca ka', ka' ncir yi ce laèa ená beèe a tañshi wa'a.	"Previously saying, ""Sacrifices and offerings and whole burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you didn't desire, neither had pleasure in them"" (those which are offered according to the law),"
Yi ka' ba wa'a, yuu ce Jáèrïìmiyaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa naè, yi ghááteè njo. E m laèa enáê,	Then that which was spoken by Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, saying,
Malu yïì Saimúèn aè noñ mbe bkuu, tu yi ce luu ye. A ka' kuè niñ wa'a, woweèe a suñ Jisoès.	Now Simon's wife's mother lay sick with a fever, and immediately they told him about her.
Yuu ce m ce laèa ená weèe gee yi yu ená weèe koñni aèmboè m koèñ weèe.	"This is my commandment, that you love one another, even as I have loved you.
John	Joân	15	13	Njáèá rkoèñnïì mo' li yu aègho a ker caa ce ená ñwáè kwe aètu bkar vi ka'.	Greater love has no one than this, that someone lay down his life for his friends.
John	Joân	15	14	Weèe aè ka' gee yuu ce máè laèa neè weèe, baná weèe yu bkar wa.	You are my friends, if you do whatever I command you.
John	Joân	15	15	AÈde' m ker too weèe ená ñgaâa mfaè' ka' njobeè' aède' ñwáè rfaè' riñ buu wááwá ce yïì masaè e ke geèe ka'. M ce too weèe ba máná bkar wa. Cena yi yu wa'a njobeè' máè suñ weèe buu wááwá ce máè yu' ese yaè Taê.	No longer do I call you servants, for the servant doesn't know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, for everything that I heard from my Father, I have made known to you.
John	Joân	15	16	AÈ m ce weèe a ce máè ka'. AÈ m ce máè a ce weèe, a tuu weèe tá weèe bo duè yú mbaèñ, tá mbaèñ anaè yi bo cu. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, weèe aè ka' loo ka' njáâá ká ese yaè Ta fa máâ rlii, e be fa yuu anaè neè weèe.	You didn't choose me, but I chose you, and appointed you, that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain; that whatever you will ask of the Father in my name, he may give it to you.
John	Joân	15	17	Yuu ce m ce laèa neè weèe yi yu ená weèe koñni.	I command these things to you, that you may love one another."
Saèkaèriyaè aè laa neè mmbo ená a fa ye ñwaè'. A ka' fa ye ñwaè', e sañ mbo enáê, “Li rlii li yu ená Joân.” Beèe wááwá a bááñgeèr seê.	"He asked for a writing tablet, and wrote, ""His name is John."" They all marveled."
Weèe aè yá aèmboè buu ca aè ghááte njo, baná weèe be suñ beèe.	You are witnesses of these things.
Beâe aè to' Juèdiyaè ba beâe aè rlaè' Jáèrusaláèm bsïìp a m duè aè ryu' yuu ce e m ce feè'shi. Woweèe a m ce suñ yaèp buu bbebep, e ce baèptir woweèe njep rdip Jodaèn.	All the country of Judea and all those of Jerusalem went out to him. They were baptized by him in the Jordan river, confessing their sins.
Mbɛp à fʉ mɛ̀.	I have been affected by cold.
Waè' mncir vi jepsi leè' ce Nyúè aè m ye naè a? Yi yu wa' ka'. Mncir vi m ka' ba túr ñger aè rfa ñwáè ryoèñ ce nfeseè, aè ba kuè ba vi ce vi m ba geèe tá beèe a ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.	Is the law then against the promises of God? Certainly not! For if there had been a law given which could make alive, most certainly righteousness would have been of the law.
Nyor wááwá aè m ba ku ba ñgúè' nyor moè'sir, yïì anaè aè ba ba nyor ka'.	If they were all one member, where would the body be?
Kuushi neè yeè buu bbebep ce weèe aè geèe, koosimnse, war neè Nyúè; fa keèr lu'shi neè ce vúèshi ka', ce war neè war ce koosi ba mnse.	Lament, mourn, and weep. Let your laughter be turned to mourning, and your joy to gloom.
Woowèe a ke sɛr nsɛr sê.	They argue a lot.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a ka' kúti a suñ ye buu wááwá ce woweèe a geèe. E lor woweèe a woweèe a lá'sïì nyor a du aè rla' mo' ce a ce too ená Báèrsaidaè.	The apostles, when they had returned, told him what things they had done. He took them, and withdrew apart to a deserted place of a city called Bethsaida.
Ca yi m fa woweèe ñger, woweèe a waseè, a ye yuu.	Then they all cheered up, and they also took food.
Máè vúè njep ñgoèñ na aèmboè rraa tá ñwáè ce e ka' byemi neè máè, e bo keèr cu aè túè'nji ka'.	I have come as a light into the world, that whoever believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
Yáê, máè suñ weèe buu ca tá nfeè' ka' gháá.	"Behold, I have told you beforehand.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	26	Baná woweèe a ka' laa neè weèe enáê, ‘Yáê, e yu aè ntee rïìñ’, weèe fa duè aèfo ka'. Woweèe a ka' laa enáê, ‘Yáê, e yu mbaè múè ndap’, weèe fa byemi ka'.	If therefore they tell you, 'Behold, he is in the wilderness,' don't go out; 'Behold, he is in the inner rooms,' don't believe it.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	27	AÈmboè mbeèñ e ke baèp ekuè mbuèuntii ñgoèñ yi raa ba' mbaè mbuèuntii naè, a mboè Muu Ñwáè be vúè aè njáâá wa'a.	For as the lightning flashes from the east, and is seen even to the west, so will be the coming of the Son of Man.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	28	E ke ba faèdïì' ce gúâú yuu yi yu, baná bjïìkaawaè vi be kaari aèfo.	For wherever the carcass is, there is where the vultures gather together.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	29	“Ñgá' aè mnoèñ anaè be caèa tá nfeè' tuuse ka', tá nyúè liiti, tá ñwáá yi ker sañ ka', tá mkaèñsïì mi gweñger embe buèu, tá buu ñger embe buèu ci'tïî.	But immediately after the oppression of those days, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light, the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	30	Vi cïì'ti wa'a, tá ncoèo ce e ce duèñshi ená Muu Ñwáè ce vúè yááti mbe buèu tá bto' enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá vi warse. Woweèe a be yá Muu Ñwáè aèmboè e ce vúè mbe múè mmbaè' embe buèu neè ñger-ñwáè, ker ba neè ku' foèo-ñwáè.	and then the sign of the Son of Man will appear in the sky. Then all the tribes of the earth will mourn, and they will see the Son of Man coming on the clouds of the sky with power and great glory.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	31	Ma rsoèñ li be laèa, tá e tuu vi bcïìndap aè mmbuu ñgoèñ kyeèe tá woweèe a baashi yïì beèe ce e m ce efa bdïì' wááwá.	He will send out his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they will gather together his chosen ones from the four winds, from one end of the sky to the other.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	24	32	“Yá'ni neè yuu efa ce fïîk. E ke baè' aè nfeè' ce yi ka' karñger, top, weèe riñ weená nfeè' mbeèñ yu aètútú.	Now from the fig tree learn this parable. When its branch has now become tender, and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near."
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m ce geèe ma njáèá ñkaè' mo' goèr, a be ku' beèe seê.	"But he said to him, ""A certain man made a great supper, and he invited many people."
Bsii ñwáè anaè vi m ce laè'ñger aèmboè kwakwa' wa'a, a ce baèñ aèmboè nloèp wa'a. Ghuèghumbeèñ yi m kaari kaèbaèraè' anaè a tarte, ncoèo efa gho aè ba aèmboè ncoèo kaèkar wa'a.	that looked like a jasper stone and a sardius. There was a rainbow around the throne, like an emerald to look at.
Seèe aè koèñni a du a misi wa'a, tá seèe bo keè wáp yuu mo' aè noèñ mnsa' ka', njobeè' seèe cu njep ñgoèñ na, a ba aèmboè ye.	In this love has been made perfect among us, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is, even so are we in this world.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè seèe, seèe yu aèmboè njáèá beèe ce a be kúti njïìnjïì loè bú ka'. Seèe be byemi ba neè Nyúè, luèñ.	But we are not of those who shrink back to destruction, but of those who have faith to the saving of the soul.
E ka' vúê, weèe koni ye aèmboè beèe Tata Nyúè a ba koni ñwáè rbyemïì. Fa neè ye yuu ce e ka' buu, njobeè' e jaè' beèe magoèr seê, a ja' máè foñ.	that you receive her in the Lord, in a way worthy of the saints, and that you assist her in whatever matter she may need from you, for she herself also has been a helper of many, and of my own self.
Wáè ka' tá fyá' aè yuu ce yu yïû ñwáè moè' boèñboñ ka', aède' fa nda wáè yuu ce yu yoè neè ñwáè?	If you have not been faithful in that which is another's, who will give you that which is your own?
Ŋwàʼ ca a kìloʼ.	This book is poorly made thing.
Jisoès aè ka' vúè baè' mbe dïì' ce ce anaè yi m ba, a ke' mbekïì, a laa neè ye enáê, “Saèkiyoès, suèu embe ce anaè cárcár, njobeè' m be kuè noèñ mbe wáâ ndaèp ntïìni na.”	"When Jesus came to the place, he looked up and saw him, and said to him, ""Zacchaeus, hurry and come down, for today I must stay at your house."""
Ñwáè fa geèe yuu bebep neè nfúr yïì aè njáèá yuu ca ka'. Weèr aè m cïìisi neè weèe wáá ená Tata Jisoès be keè kúsi mcucu' neè beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca.	that no one should take advantage of and wrong a brother or sister in this matter; because the Lord is an avenger in all these things, as also we forewarned you and testified.
Moè' efa ñgaâa mfaâ' ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì naè, ce e m ba raèraâ ñwáè ce Pitaè aè m tee yi tuè' naè, aè m laèa neè Pitaè enáê, “Mboè máè m yá weèe ye mbe ñka' bce a?”	"One of the servants of the high priest, being a relative of him whose ear Peter had cut off, said, ""Didn't I see you in the garden with him?"""
Tɛ̀ŋ à to lɛʼ.	The calabash has a hole.
E m ce laèa ba aèmboè Judaès muu Saimún IÌskarïìyoèt. Judaès ca ce e m ba moè' efa múè beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú, aè m ba ñwáè ce e be loè fyeèni ye.	Now he spoke of Judas, the son of Simon Iscariot, for it was he who would betray him, being one of the twelve.
Yarsi muu cɛ̀ʼ.	Dress up the child.
Ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a ka' ba a Jisoès weèe, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Tataê, waè' aè be kúsi ñger neè beèe Isráèl seè'ni na a?”	"Therefore, when they had come together, they asked him, ""Lord, are you now restoring the kingdom to Israel?"""
Woweèe a gú'shïì neè ye, a nati a kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm neè rlu'shïì-ñwáè seê.	They worshiped him, and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
Abraèham ce yu yeè ta aè m lu'shi ená e be yá nfeè' yaè. E m yá, a lu'shi.”	"Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day. He saw it, and was glad."""
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger yi ba mbe nshe mboèñmboñ naè táá aètu ñwáè ce e yu' blaâa Nyúè, yu' boèñboñ seê, gee ñgúè, moè' ba rjeèe, moè' ba mntuunfu, moè' ba mntaar.”	"What was sown on the good ground, this is he who hears the word, and understands it, who most certainly bears fruit, and brings forth, some one hundred times as much, some sixty, and some thirty."""
Máèári aè ka' yá ye, a du a suñ beèe ce a m ce ba a Jisoès weèe. Woweèe a m ce cu rkwe, a ce warse.	She went and told those who had been with him, as they mourned and wept.
E ku yop dìʼ anà wɛɛwɛ.	She has occupied that entire place.
Cu neè neè rkoèñnïì-ñwáè aèmboè Jisos Kraâis ye ye aè m koèñ seèe, a fa li ryoèñ a seâe btuè naè. Li ryoèñ ce e m fa na, li m ba aèmboè rfa ce a fa, Nyúè aè yu' rboèñ aègho seê.	Walk in love, even as Christ also loved you, and gave himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling fragrance.
Beèe Farïìsi a m vúè, a ce taase Jisoès. Woweèe a m ce roèo aè rmoèoshi ye, awá a laa neè ye ená e duñshi woweèe ncoèo embe buèu.	The Pharisees came out and began to question him, seeking from him a sign from heaven, and testing him.
Weêe bta ba weêe mmaê, ba bfúr wee ba beèe ce weèe woweèe aè raète, ba bkar wee, a be fyeèni weèe, tá a yúshi beèe mo' efa weèe.	You will be handed over even by parents, brothers, relatives, and friends. They will cause some of you to be put to death.
E m ce kwaè'shi foñ ená Pol be yuni ye. E ka' ce kwaè'shi wa'a, a ce ká' Pol aèfo aèfo a ce de' a ye.	Meanwhile, he also hoped that money would be given to him by Paul, that he might release him. Therefore also he sent for him more often, and talked with him.
E tii ŋkùp, a yɛ bcɛ̀ʼ njo.	He opened the box partly and saw clothes inside.
Beèe ce a m yu' njeèndoñ Nyúè a tee btu neè Nyúè aè m ba weèe ká? AÈ m ba beèe ce Musïìs aè m fúr efa bkwaèa aè to' Ijïìp eluâuñgoèñ naè.	For who, when they heard, rebelled? No, didn't all those who came out of Egypt by Moses?
M yu njep woweèe aèmboè aè yu njep máè foñ naè, tá woweèe a bo ba ñwáè moè'sir neè mini-ñwáè, tá ñgoèñ yi bo rïìñ ená wáè m tuu máè, keèr rïìñ foñ ená wáè m koèñ woweèe aèmboè wáè m koèñ máè foñ naè.	I in them, and you in me, that they may be perfected into one; that the world may know that you sent me, and loved them, even as you loved me.
Joân aè m ba mbe shañ. A ka' yu' mfaè' ce Kraâis aè m ce geèe, a tuu ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená,	Now when John heard in the prison the works of Christ, he sent two of his disciples
Woweèe a be suñ beèe blaâa Nyúè mïìsi, tá nyaâa ntatap ce e m fúú enjep rwee ce lúèsimbuèu yu aègho ka' naè, ma' bïìr a woweèe. E maè' bïìr a woweèe wa'a, so woweèe, yúshi woweèe.	When they have finished their testimony, the beast that comes up out of the abyss will make war with them, and overcome them, and kill them.
Yòo tâ kaʼ tuu wɛ̀, à shê, banɛ a ntèetu.	If your father sends you and you refuse, that is stubbornness.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèr rïìñ buu ca, weèr ce suñ beèe buu Nyúè rara seê, a ke' ce súèti yuu mo' ka'.	Having therefore such a hope, we use great boldness of speech,
Yu njo' ntee boèñboñ ca ce weèe aè m luèñ efa rkwe aè nfeè' ce weèe aè m byemi neè Jisoès. Cena yi m loè ba ese weèe ka'. Nyúè aè m fa neè weèe aè cicïì.	for by grace you have been saved through faith, and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God,
Woweèe a lo koèñ ba aè rcu aè cicïì, ce kar aè mndap beèe mo' foñ. Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a lo káè' mnsa'ni, keèr ce jepsi ntaè'teè beèe mo', ce laèa buu ce woweèe a ba laèa ka'.	Besides, they also learn to be idle, going about from house to house. Not only idle, but also gossips and busybodies, saying things which they ought not.
AÈ m ba eluâuñgoèñ, beèe ce a m ce laèa ená a ce cep ntuu Nyúè, a ba ba ñgaâa mnde' naè, a m ku ba aè múè beèe Nyúè. Ñgaâa ryá'nïì ce a yu ñgaâa mnde' a be loè ba a weâe mú foñ aèmboè ñgaâa mnde' a m ba aè múè beèe Nyúè eluâuñgoèñ naè. Woweèe a be vúè neè ryá'nïû rbebep, bo' beèe, bepsi woweèe aègho. Woweèe a be kani yaèp masaè Kraâis ce e m tee woweèe efa bkwaèa naè. Yuu ce woweèe a be geèe na yi be geèe tá woweèe a bú aè cicïì cárcár.	But false prophets also arose among the people, as false teachers will also be among you, who will secretly bring in destructive heresies, denying even the Master who bought them, bringing on themselves swift destruction.
M túr buu magoèr ce m ba baè sañ neè wáè, m be keèr sañ sañ ka'.	I had many things to write to you, but I am unwilling to write to you with ink and pen;
Ŋkʉʉ e ke bʉ banɛ a be ghar mòʼ.	When a chief dies another one is crowned.
Woweèe a m ce roèo aè rkoo ye, a ce wáp beèe njobeè' beèe a m byemi ená e yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	When they sought to seize him, they feared the multitudes, because they considered him to be a prophet.
Bsa'mbeèñ anaè vi ka' wañger, máè ce kwaè'shi máná m be sañ yuu ce bsa'mbeèñ anaè vi laèa. Máè ka' ce kwaè'shi wa'a, a yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè suu embe buèu enáê, “Fa geèe tá ñwáè moè' riñ yuu ce bsa'mbeèñ anaè vi laèa ka'. Fa sañ blaèa anaè mbe ñwaè' ka'.”	"When the seven thunders sounded, I was about to write; but I heard a voice from the sky saying, ""Seal up the things which the seven thunders said, and don't write them."""
Yaèp masaè aè ká' ñwáè rfaè' anaè a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Ñwáè bsaèrbuu caê, wáè ba bu' mmbo neè máè, máè laa máná máè maè'shi ku' mbaèa anaè neè wáè.	Then his lord called him in, and said to him, 'You wicked servant! I forgave you all that debt, because you begged me.
Fa mɛ̀ bɛr shà e nèŋkùr tɛ m̀ no.	Give me the remaining corn beer of yesterday so that I drink.
Weèr aè laèa werná ñwáè yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ce ñgaèñ ka' byemi; ca yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe neè mncir ka'.	We maintain therefore that a man is justified by faith apart from the works of the law.
Mú nfeè' aè ka' tuuse, ñwáè moè' aè ker yá ye a laa enáê, “A wáè moè' efa woweèe foñ.” Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “Mbañruèñwáè caê, a máè moè' ka'.”	"After a little while someone else saw him, and said, ""You also are one of them!"" But Peter answered, ""Man, I am not!"""
Beèe mo' efa woweèe a tee btu, a kani aè rbyemïì, a ce laèa bebep aèmboè nduunjïì Tata aè bsii beèe. Pol aè fúú efa waâp mú a lor ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a du aègho mbe ndap ñwaè' Tïìranoès, e ce yá'ni woweèe buu mbo aè mnoèñ wááwá.	But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the disciples, reasoning daily in the school of Tyrannus.
Njenwɛ̀ e ke tʉr ŋger àmbo mbaŋrùŋwɛ̀ kaʼ.	A woman cannot be as powerful as a man.
Pastò à du à rfèʼshi blǎanyʉ̀ ser Beŋkà.	The pastor has gone to preach the word God at Binka.
Baná weèr ce tuu Judaès ba Silaès. Woweèe a be suñ weèe buu ce weèr aè sañ na, neè yap cuèu foñ.	We have sent therefore Judas and Silas, who themselves will also tell you the same things by word of mouth.
Weèe koñni aèmboè bfúr. Weèe naa beèe moè' mbekïì caa aèmboè weèe ce naèa wee btu.	In love of the brothers be tenderly affectionate one to another; in honor preferring one another;
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Ñwáè moè' rïìñ ntee Nyúè ka'. Ñwáè moè' yu ce aède' e cep Tata Nyúè ka'.” AÈ ka' ba aèmboè seèe, seèe túr ntee Jisos Kraêis.	For who has known the mind of the Lord, that he should instruct him? But we have Christ's mind.
Túè' aè ka' raa, ku' beèe ce a m vúè aè rye ñkaè' naè, a yu' ená Jisoès ce vúè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	On the next day a great multitude had come to the feast. When they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a m ba neè du aè ryuu byee aè múè rla'.	For his disciples had gone away into the city to buy food.
Mbò ŋwɛ̀ ca a ŋwɛ̀ ce a ròo à rzhʉ nà a?	Is this not the person they are trying to kill?
Woweèe a ke caèasi nfeè' aè ryú ñwáè ka'.	"Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Romans	Ruêm	3	16	Woweèe a ce bepsi buu, a ce vúè neè ñgá' aènduè beèe aè bdïì' wááwá ce woweèe a ka' ce duè.	Destruction and misery are in their ways.
Romans	Ruêm	3	17	Woweèe a rïìñ aè rcu a beèe weèe neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè ka'.	The way of peace, they haven't known."
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ entombïì embe múè ñgaèa, aè nfeè' nyúè aè baèp e kuèmbuèuntii, woweèe a ce du faèdïì' rsheè li m ba naè.	Very early on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb when the sun had risen.
E yu ŋwer, e kaʼ fa wɛ̀ yuu banɛ à tʉr mbòŋtu sê.	He is a stingy person, if he gives you something then you are a lucky person.
Muunje ca aè ker yá Pitaè, a ker laa neè beèe ce a m ba aèfo enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu moè' efa woweèe.”	"The maid saw him, and began again to tell those who stood by, ""This is one of them."""
Wɛ diʼ, à du ŋguu.	When you stay behind, go and fetch firewood.
Jisoès aè m ker laa enáê, “M yu msini gráâp ce mini. Yaè Ta a ñwáè ce e ke ke' aè msini ca.	"I am the true vine, and my Father is the farmer.
John	Joân	15	2	Mba' efa gho ce e ka' ce yú ka', e gwar ma'. Mba' ce e ka' ce yú, e kupshïì tá e bo yú goèr.	Every branch in me that doesn't bear fruit, he takes away. Every branch that bears fruit, he prunes, that it may bear more fruit.
John	Joân	15	3	A kupshi wee weèe foñ, weèe aè raa njobeè' blaèa ce máè laèa neè weèe.	You are already pruned clean because of the word which I have spoken to you.
John	Joân	15	4	Cu neè njep máè tá m cu njep weèe. AÈmboè aède' mba' fartïì enje msini, ker yú ka' naè, weèe aè ka' tá cu njep máè foñ ka', aède' weèe gee yuu mo' ka'.	Remain in me, and I in you. As the branch can't bear fruit by itself, unless it remains in the vine, so neither can you, unless you remain in me.
John	Joân	15	5	M yu msini, weèe aè ba mmba'. Ñwáè ce e ka' cu njep máè, má máè cu njep ye, baná ñgaèñ be yú mbaèñ goèr seê. Weèe aè ka' tá cu njep máè ka' aède' weèe gee yuu mo' ka'.	I am the vine. You are the branches. He who remains in me, and I in him, the same bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing.
John	Joân	15	6	Ñwáè aè ka' tá cu njep máè ka', baná a be maè' ñgaèñ aèmboè mba' msini, tá e yuushi. A ke baashi njáèá mmba' anaè, ma' njep mor vi she.	If a man doesn't remain in me, he is thrown out as a branch, and is withered; and they gather them, throw them into the fire, and they are burned.
John	Joân	15	7	Weèe aè ka' cu njep máè, wa blaèa vi cu njep weèe, weèe aè ka' loo ka' njáèá ká ce weèe koèñ ese máè, m be fa yuu anaè neè weèe.	If you remain in me, and my words remain in you, you will ask whatever you desire, and it will be done for you.
John	Joân	15	8	Yuu ce aède' a ku'sïì yaè Ta aègho yi yu ená weèe yú mbaèñ goèr. Cena yi be duèñshi ená weèe yu ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu.	In this is my Father glorified, that you bear much fruit; and so you will be my disciples."
Wɛ̌ lò vʉ̀.	Come later.
M ce suñ weèe máná ñwáè ka' juu ñgwa yïì, ke' ba njobeè' ená ñgwa yïì aè noèñ a mbañruèñwáè moè' ka', ker lor ñgwa moè', baná ñgaèñ aè koo njeñwáè ce yu ñgwa yïì ka'.”	"I tell you that whoever divorces his wife, except for sexual immorality, and marries another, commits adultery; and he who marries her when she is divorced commits adultery."""
Kuushi neè ñgwa Loêt.	Remember Lot's wife!
A woowèe a dàa ŋgoo a ce vʉ̀ nà.	There they are coming in a large number.
yá'ni woweèe tá a gee buu wááwá ce máè laèa neè weèe. Rïìñ neè ená m be ba weèe seèe aè nfeè' wááwá caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi be mïì.”	"teaching them to observe all things that I commanded you. Behold, I am with you always, even to the end of the age."" Amen."
Yi ka' ba wa'a, e natïì a cañ a du a yá Saimún Pitaè ba ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès moè' ce Jisoès aè m koèñ ye se naè, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “A fúr Tata enjep rsheè, a du aègho, weèr aè rïìñ faèdïì' ce a láè ye ka'.”	"Therefore she ran and came to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and said to them, ""They have taken away the Lord out of the tomb, and we don't know where they have laid him!"""
Woweèe a m duè ba' aè rla' Kaèpanuèm. AÈ ka' ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, Jisoès aè ku niñ mbe ndaèp rloo, a ká' a ce yá'ni beèe.	They went into Capernaum, and immediately on the Sabbath day he entered into the synagogue and taught.
E ka' yu' aèmboè kúr beèe a ce caèa, e bipshïì ená yu ba ká lá?	Hearing a multitude going by, he asked what this meant.
Weèe aè ka' ke yu' ená a ce maè' bïìr, ker yu' aèmboè ñgaâa ñgá' a ce káè' ñgá', weèe fa wáp ka'. Buu ca be kuè ke ká' koni, vi koni wa'a, ke' ba ená nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi be mïì aè gháá ka'.”	"When you hear of wars and disturbances, don't be terrified, for these things must happen first, but the end won't come immediately."""
njobeè' ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rboñshi li ryoèñ baná ñgaèñ be bá li. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá boñshi li ryoèñ ka', njo' máè, baná ñgaèñ be koni li.	For whoever desires to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.
Beèe a ka' ce cáp weèe njo' Jisos Kraêis, baná weèe yu ñgaâa mboâñtu, njobeè' yú' ce yi ke vúè neè foèo, ce yu yú' Nyúè naè, yi yu mbe weâe nduè.	If you are insulted for the name of Christ, you are blessed; because the Spirit of glory and of God rests on you. On their part he is blasphemed, but on your part he is glorified.
Ñwáè cumúnyañ aè ka' ba mbe ndaèp anaè baná yeè cumúnyañ be duè neè ñgaèñ. Ñwáè cumúnyañ aè ka' tá ba mbo ka', yeè cumúnyañ kútïì neè weèe.	If a son of peace is there, your peace will rest on him; but if not, it will return to you.
Mbɛp ce fʉte sê.	The temperature is very low.
Ñgaâa ntuu a laa neè Tata enáê, “Kuè'si ler rbyemïì.”	"The apostles said to the Lord, ""Increase our faith."""
A m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená Nyúè be keè geèe tá beèe enje jáá a ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii njobeè' woweèe a byemi neè ye. A m sañ eluâuñgoèñ aèmboè Nyúè aè m feè'shi nsuñ mboèñmboñ neè Abraèhaêm. E m laèa neè ye enáê, “M be ghoèni bto' enjep ñgoèñ na wááwá njo' wáè.”	"The Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Gentiles by faith, preached the Good News beforehand to Abraham, saying, ""In you all the nations will be blessed."""
Tɛ̀ɛ yoʼ à bòʼ yoʼ mɛ̀ mbe njì.	Retain rubbing oil on your finger and rub it on my back.
E maè' saèaro ce a fúèú njep bláá. A too li rlii enáê, “Nlaèa Nyúè.”	"He is clothed in a garment sprinkled with blood. His name is called ""The Word of God."""
Ñwáè moè' ker ba ce e túr weèe njep ntee aèmboè máè, caa efa Timotïì ka'.	For I have no one else like-minded, who will truly care about you.
Nyúè aè ka' kuèu ñgoèñ, túè' aè sii, ká' aè nyúè ncoèp-baa du ba' aè nyúè taar.	When the sixth hour had come, there was darkness over the whole land until the ninth hour.
Ñwáè rfaè' aè kútïì a suñ buu ce woweèe a m laèa neè yïì masaè. Ntee yi yañ masaè ñwáè ndap ca, e laa neè yïì ñwáè rfaè' ca enáê, ‘Duè neè aè btase ba aè btar mndap vú neè ñgaâa fuèp, ba beèe ce a kepñger, ba beèe ce a feèp, ker ba mntáèñ.’	"That servant came, and told his lord these things. Then the master of the house, being angry, said to his servant, 'Go out quickly into the streets and lanes of the city, and bring in the poor, maimed, blind, and lame.'
Luke	Luêk	14	22	Ñwáè rfaè' anaè aè kútïì, a laa enáê, ‘Masaè, máè geèe yuu ce wáè laèa. Ndap aè be ruu ka'.’	The servant said, 'Lord, it is done as you commanded, and there is still room.'"
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka'.	"Jesus answered them, ""Be careful that no one leads you astray."
Beèe wááwá a m yu'shi yuu ce e m ce laèa boèñboñ, ká' embe beâe bká'ká' du ba' mbe beâe bgoèrgoèr, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñger Nyúè ce a ce too ená Ñger Ce Goèr naè.”	"to whom they all listened, from the least to the greatest, saying, ""This man is that great power of God."""
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Joân aè m ce baèptir beèe aè rla' Ánoèn aègee rla' Salïìm. Mdip mi m ba aèfo seê. Beèe a m ce vúè, e ce baèptir woweèe.	John also was baptizing in Enon near Salim, because there was much water there. They came, and were baptized.
Awaè vi ka' caèa aèmboâ btaar, ñgwa yïì a vúê, a ke' riñ yuu ce yi ba koni ka'.	About three hours later, his wife, not knowing what had happened, came in.
Woweèe a m ce náèsi Nyúè, beèe a ce yu' rboèñ neè woweèe. Tata aè m ce kyeèse beèe ce a m luèñ efa ñgá' na a múè beèe ca aè mnoèñ wááwá.	praising God, and having favor with all the people. The Lord added to the assembly day by day those who were being saved.
Sèe keŋsi ŋgʉp tɛ zhi niŋ mbe ndàp.	Lets drive the fowls towards the house.
Nfò [ɱfɔ̀] tit 1a/6.	another name of a chief.
Ghèter rfàʼ anà.	Try to do that job.
Tu yi ka' túr nyor aèmboè byuèñ nyor vi ke cú'te nyor, gee nyor ba moè'sir naè, mñgúè' nyor wááwá vi ce faè' aèmboè vi ba ce faè', baná nyor wááwá be ku', tap. A mboè nyor Jisos Kraâis yu wa'a, ce ñwáè wááwá aè ka' koñ beèe moè'.	from whom all the body, being fitted and knit together through that which every joint supplies, according to the working in measure of each individual part, makes the body increase to the building up of itself in love.
Bcuèu ñka' ce a sïìr rla' anaè aègho vi be kuè táá btoo aè nfeè' wááwá. A be cete ka' njobeè' aède' túè' sii aè rla' anaè ka'.	Its gates will in no way be shut by day (for there will be no night there),
AÈ m ba nyúè moè' Jisoès aè ce loo mbe dïû' mo', a ka' loo mïìsi, ñwáè moè' efa múè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, yá'ni weèr aè rgeèe rloo aèmboè Joân aè m yá'ni ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu foñ naè.”	"It happened, that when he finished praying in a certain place, one of his disciples said to him, ""Lord, teach us to pray, just as John also taught his disciples."""
No ndoŋ mdip anà njàʼ mòʼsir.	Drink that cup of water at once.
Wèr ye à ba yuu mŋwàʼ e vʉ a bʉsi bvii.	We bought books and she misplaced hers.
Kuushi ená Nyúè aè m geèe yi ñgeâe boèñboñ yi yáátïì aèwañ tá beèe wááwá a bo luèñ.	For the grace of God has appeared, bringing salvation to all men,
Muu ha à jàte zhìi cicà nè mcɛp.	This child has inflicted his teacher with insults.
Jisoès aè beesïì a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená, weèe aè ka' byemi ke' ce tarni ka', aède' weèe ku gee ba yuu ce máè geèe neè ce fik na caè'caè' ka', aède' weèe ku laa neè rtuèu ca foñ ená, ‘Co'ti embo naè du gwe njep rdip rgoèr’, yi ku ba wa'a.	"Jesus answered them, ""Most certainly I tell you, if you have faith, and don't doubt, you will not only do what was done to the fig tree, but even if you told this mountain, 'Be taken up and cast into the sea,' it would be done."
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ce a m vúâ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a m laèa ená Básábuèl yu njep ye, a ker ce laèa ená e ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' aè ñger ñkúú mnyúâmkaè'.	"The scribes who came down from Jerusalem said, ""He has Beelzebul,"" and, ""By the prince of the demons he casts out the demons."""
À kaʼ cɛ̀ɛcɛ njep nduunjì banɛ mutù be bʉʼ wɛ̀.	If you waste time crossing the road therefore the vehicle will knock you down.
Rbyemïì ce li yu rrara a ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Taê, li yu ená ñwáè ja' boo ñkú ba byepkúú ce a ce yá ñgá'. Li yu foñ ená ñwáè fa maè'shi tá ñgoèñ yi bo' ye ka'.	Pure religion and undefiled before our God and Father is this: to visit the fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
E ka' cu aèfo aè mú nfeè' moè', a nati a jár aè ñgoâñ Gaèláshaè ba Frijïìyaè, a ce fa ñger neè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès ce a m ba aè bdïì' anaè wááwá.	Having spent some time there, he departed, and went through the region of Galatia, and Phrygia, in order, establishing all the disciples.
Mɛ̌ kòŋ ŋgɛʼ kaʼ.	Give my kola.
Ñwáè ce e ce fyá' beèe Nyúè yu ñwáè ce mfaè' Nyúè mi yu mba yeâ mmboè. Baná yi ñgeèe yi ba boèñboñ. E fa naèa tu káè túr ntee cácáp ka'. E fa lá ntee aè buu mno ka'. E fa ba ñwáè ce e ce geèe buu ba aè mntee ka'. E fa ba ñwáè roñ mbaèa ka'.	For the overseer must be blameless, as God's steward; not self-pleasing, not easily angered, not given to wine, not violent, not greedy for dishonest gain;
káè yu ba vïì embe buèu áè, káè yu ba vïì enjep múè nshe áè, káè yu ba yuu mo' efa buu ce Nyúè aè m geèe áè, yuu mo' yi yu ce aède' yi gapnïì seèe efa rkoèñnïì ce Nyúè koèñ seèe njo' Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe naè ka'.	nor height, nor depth, nor any other created thing, will be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
a du bipshi neè ye enáê, “A wáè ñwáè ce yi m ba ená e be vúè naè káè weèr cu ce ke' ba ñwáâ jáá?”	"and said to him, ""Are you he who comes, or should we look for another?"""
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir, a m toshi ye neè ñger-ñwáè seê.	The chief priests and the scribes stood, vehemently accusing him.
M ce yá ñgá' ca tá beèe ce Nyúè aè ce a bo byemi neè Jisos Kraêis, koni ryoâñ rfi, koni bkuè' ce vi be keè mïì ka'.	Therefore I endure all things for the chosen ones' sake, that they also may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal glory.
Mɛ̀ mar baa.	I have eaten fufu more than enough.
Ŋgwe be koo nyàa anà.	The dog will catch that animal.
Ghèter jaʼ yoo tu kaʼ jaʼ bèe moʼ.	Try and help yourself before helping the others.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr ba bleebeèe ca, a barsïì beèe ená woweèe a laa neè Pailáèt ená e laa tá a fúr Baèrabaès, yú Jisoès.	Now the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes to ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
Lamáèk aè ba muu Máètusálaè, Máètusálaè aè ba muu Ánoèk, Ánoèk aè ba muu Járáèr, Járáèr aè ba muu Maèhaèláláèr, Maèhaèláláèr aè ba muu Kaèyinaèn,	the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
E ka' baè' aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a niñ mbe Ndaèp Nyúè, a ce yá'ni beèe mbo. Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba bleebeèe, a vú a yá ye, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Ñger ce aè ce geèe buu ca aègho yi loè efá, ñwáè ce e fa wáè ñger ca aè fa nda?”	"When he had come into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him as he was teaching, and said, ""By what authority do you do these things? Who gave you this authority?"""
E karsïì nyor, a laa neè Pitaè enáê, “Loè efa máâ geñ, Sataèn! AÈ ce jepsi máè. Mo mkwaè'shïì mi yu ba mi ñwáè, yu mi Nyúè ka'.”	"But he turned, and said to Peter, ""Get behind me, Satan! You are a stumbling block to me, for you are not setting your mind on the things of God, but on the things of men."""
Muu à leʼ enɛ e be dù àmbùu zhìi mâ.	The child insisted that she would follow her mother.
Loo neè ená Nyúè ghoni beèe ce a ce fa weèe ñgá'. Fa loo neè ená ndoèo co' woweèe ka', loo neè ba ená Nyúè ghoni woweèe.	Bless those who persecute you; bless, and don't curse.
À ce kèʼ dòʼdòʼ waʼ njokɛ?	Why are you looking so dull?
Weèe aè yá war ená Tata aè geèe yuu boèñboñ neè weèe.	if indeed you have tasted that the Lord is gracious:
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yá bcïìndap Nyúè vi kyeèe aèmboè a tááte aè mmbuu ñgoèñ kyeèe. A m táá wa'a, a cete fu' ce yi ke vúâ aè mmbuu ñgoèñ anaè, faè dïì' yi bo keèr ce caèa ka'. Fu' yi m ker caa mbenduè nshe káè mbenduè mdip enjep roè ka', a ker ce cïì' bce foñ ka'.	After this, I saw four angels standing at the four corners of the earth, holding the four winds of the earth, so that no wind would blow on the earth, or on the sea, or on any tree.
njobeè' m ku ba weèe soè. Ñwáè moè' be geèe yuu mo' bebep neè wáè ka', njobeè' ku' yaè beèe a yu aè rla' ca seê.”	"for I am with you, and no one will attack you to harm you, for I have many people in this city."""
Kwâa anà yu gòr sê.	The corn is too much.
M ce laèa neè wáè tatap aè bsii Nyúè, ker ba aè bsii Jisos Kraâis ce e be keè sa' beèe wááwá ce a cu bteèe ker ba beèe ce a kweñger. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' e be vúè tá e bo sa' woweèe aèmboè ñkúú, m ce laèa neè wáè ená,	I command you therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who will judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom:
Wèr ye à ce gèe mcɛ̌r e bar mɛ̀.	We were joking and he responded with anger.
E suèusi beâe bgoèrgoèr embe mnta', a ku'si beâe bká'ká'.	He has put down princes from their thrones. And has exalted the lowly.
Woweèe a bipshïì neè ye enáê, “Yuu ce aède' weèr geêe, tá yi ka' ba ená weèr ce geèe mfaè' Nyúè yu ká?”	"They said therefore to him, ""What must we do, that we may work the works of God?"""
Yi yu ená ñwáè ce e ka' túr yuu, baná a be keèr fa ye buu moè', tá e misi túr buu goèr. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá túr yuu ka', baná a be koo ka' mú yïì ce e túr naè ese ye.	For to everyone who has will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who doesn't have, even that which he has will be taken away.
Ñwáè ce e ka' máñni máè aè bsii beèe baná má máè foñ be máñni ye aè bsii yaè Ta embe buèu foñ.	But whoever denies me before men, him I will also deny before my Father who is in heaven.
Bèe a bàʼti àmbùu njɛ̀ɛ fʉ̀shì anà sê.	People have gone after that kind of umbrella so much.
Weèe aè laèa wee ká?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Yi yu ená a yú ye.”	"What do you think?"" They answered, ""He is worthy of death!"""
E toseè yi yu aè btar beèe a duê.	But he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, cena yu yuu ce a yá'ni weèe a kuu Jisos Kraâis ka'.	But you did not learn Christ that way;
Yi yu ená weèe yu beèe Kraêis, Kraâis aè ba ñwáè yïì Nyúè.	and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's.
Weèr aè cete yer ntee ese weèe ka', yu ba weèe ce weèe aè cete ye ntee ese weèr.	You are not restricted by us, but you are restricted by your own affections.
E beesïì enáê, “Weèe aè ba moo laèr njobeè' le rbyemïì li yu múcaèr aèmboè ñgúè mostaè. M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená le rbyemïì li ka' ba múcaèr se aèmboè ñgúè mostaè, aède' weèe ku laa neè rtuèu ca enáê, co'ti embe na, du mbena, tá li ku co'ti, tá yuu mo' yi ker ba tatap neè weèe ka'.	"He said to them, ""Because of your unbelief. For most certainly I tell you, if you have faith as a grain of mustard seed, you will tell this mountain, 'Move from here to there,' and it will move; and nothing will be impossible for you."
Máè yá neè mini-ñwáè, a ce suñ weèe rara ená ñwáè anaè yu Muu Nyúè.”	"I have seen, and have testified that this is the Son of God."""
Máè yu' aèmboè ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m túr ñger mbenduè mdip naè aè laèa enáê, “Wáè ce aè yu ñwáâ nrara, wáè m ba, a ba seè'ni na. Wáè teni mnsa' ca yáánïì.	"I heard the angel of the waters saying, ""You are righteous, who are and who were, you Holy One, because you have judged these things."
“Yá'ni neè yuu ese ce fik ca: Bfuè efa gho vi ke kaèrñger, e ba aè nfeè' ce yi ka' karñger, top, weèe riñ weená nfeè' mbeèñ yu aètútú.	"Now from the fig tree, learn this parable. When the branch has now become tender, and puts forth its leaves, you know that the summer is near;
Mark	Maêk	13	29	Weèe aè ka' yá aèmboè buu ca vi ce koni, weèe yi weená Muu Ñwáè yu aètútú seê.	even so you also, when you see these things coming to pass, know that it is near, at the doors.
Mark	Maêk	13	30	M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná ñgúè beâe seè'ni be kweñger wáá tá buu ca ka' ba ka'.	Most certainly I say to you, this generation will not pass away until all these things happen.
Mark	Maêk	13	31	Rbuu ba nshe a be keè mïì, geewa'a wa blaèa vi be keè mïì aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Heaven and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away.
Mark	Maêk	13	32	Ñwáè yi noèñ káè nfeè' ce buu ca vi be koni ka', ka' bcïìndap Nyúè embe buèu, ka' Muu, ku yi Taèr noèñ ba nfeè' anaè.	But of that day or that hour no one knows, not even the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father.
Mark	Maêk	13	33	Loèr neè nfeè'! Fa buumi neè ka', njobeè' weèe rïìñ nfeè' ce buu ca vi be koni ka'.	Watch, keep alert, and pray; for you don't know when the time is.
Mark	Maêk	13	34	Yi yu aèmboè ñwáè ce e maè'shi li rla' a du ñkar aè to' mo', a ma'shi yïì ndap neè yi ñgaâa mfaè' a laa neè ñwáè rcïìñ ndap ená e ce ke'nïî.	It is like a man, traveling to another country, having left his house, and given authority to his servants, and to each one his work, and also commanded the doorkeeper to keep watch."
Mboè weèr túr ñger aè rkoo byee ker ba buu mno ese beèe njo' rfaè' ce weèr ce geèe neè woweèe a?	Have we no right to eat and to drink?
À be dù ntaa a?	Will you go to the market?
A ker sañ foñ enáê, “Beèe enje jáá, lu'shi neè weèe beèe Nyúè weèe.”	"Again he says, ""Rejoice, you Gentiles, with his people."""
Ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsi a vú mbo neè ñgwa ñwáè moè' ce a m koo a mbañruèñwáè, a tár kuèntombïì neè beèe wááwá, a laa neè Jisoès enáê,	The scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman taken in adultery. Having set her in the midst,
Nyúè aè m ka' ma' woweèe, bár beèe enjep ñgoèñ a konïì fáñ aè rkúti aèbee a Nyúè weèe, baná yi be ba aè njáâá ká aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè ka' koo woweèe aè yïì beèe? Yi be ba aèmboè beèe ce a kweñger a kúti lá bteèe wa'a.	For if the rejection of them is the reconciling of the world, what would their acceptance be, but life from the dead?
Nsaʼ à koo ye njobèʼ e zhɛ̀ɛ cɛ̀ʼ.	He lost the case because he stole a cloth.
AÈde' weèe yá seè'ni ená rbyemïì Abraèham ba yïì ndeâe mboèñmboñ a m ku ce jáèr aèbee. Yuu ce Abraèham aè m geèe yi m geèe li rbyemïì li ghááteè.	You see that faith worked with his works, and by works faith was perfected;
To aè ku riñ mncir ce vi laèa enáê, ‘Fa yú ka', fa koo ñgwa ñwáè káè noèñ weèe nduu ñwáè ka', fa yáèá ka', fa táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ ka', fa fïìp ñwáè ka', yu'ni neè yoè ta ba yoè maê.” ’	"You know the commandments: 'Do not murder,' 'Do not commit adultery,' 'Do not steal,' 'Do not give false testimony,' 'Do not defraud,' 'Honor your father and mother.'"""
Máè yá rla' rrara ce a m ce too ená Jáèrusaláèm ce nfi aèmboè li ce suèu embe buèu. AÈ m suèusi Nyúè a suusi li. Li m boèñ aèmboè njeñwáè ce e suèsi nyor tá e bo duè mbe ndaèp nduu yïì wa'a.	I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband.
Woweèe a m geèe wa'a, a tuusi rfa anaè neè Baènabaès ba Soêl, ená woweèe a du fa neè btu embe coêr.	which they also did, sending it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.
E ke ba aè nfeè' wááwá ce weèr ce loo neè weèe, weèr ce yoèñshi Nyúè ce e yu Taèr neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraêis,	We give thanks to God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, praying always for you,
E yu kùyɛɛ sê.	He is very straightforward.
Máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè suèu embe buèu a coo aèmboè rdip ce li ce gweè aè rkoñ wa'a, a rúúñger aèmboè mbeèñ e ke wañger ce rúèúñger naè. Njeèndoñ anaè aè m laèa aèmboè mluñ ce beèe a ce bu' wa'a.	I heard a sound from heaven, like the sound of many waters, and like the sound of a great thunder. The sound which I heard was like that of harpists playing on their harps.
tá cor anaè bo ba jáá. E m loèr mdip ce yu blaâa Nyúè a gee cor aè ba nrara aègho,	that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it by the washing of water with the word,
Woweèe a waa enáê, “Taa ye mbe kïìntaa.”	"They cried out again, ""Crucify him!"""
Yá neè aèmboè Taèr aè koèñ seèe seê, a ce too seèe aè boo vi naè. Neè mini- ñwáè, seèe yu boo vi. Mbuèu ce ñgoèñ yi máñni seèe yu njobeè' yi m máñni ye.	Behold, how great a love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called children of God! For this cause the world doesn't know us, because it didn't know him.
E ka' ba mimñgi' beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ba beèe mo' a vúê, a laa neè ye ená e suñ woweèe mbuèu efa ñgaèa ca.	When he was alone, those who were around him with the twelve asked him about the parables.
M ce laèa neè weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená, tá rbuu li ka' keèe mïì, tá ñgoèñ yi mi foñ, aède' mú yuu mo' embe ñwaâ' mncir yi ke du faè yuu ka', caar tá buu wááwá ghááte njo.	For most certainly, I tell you, until heaven and earth pass away, not even one smallest letter or one tiny pen stroke shall in any way pass away from the law, until all things are accomplished.
Kwaè'shi aèmboè buu ce máè suñ wáè na, tá Tata ku gee tá aè riñ vi.	Consider what I say, and may the Lord give you understanding in all things.
A m ce loèr bláá mbú ba bláá muu naè', ba bú efa muu naè' ce a toèo, ñwañshi beèe ce woweèe a m ba brara aè bsii Nyúè ka' aègho tá woweèe a bo ba brara.	For if the blood of goats and bulls, and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling those who have been defiled, sanctify to the cleanness of the flesh:
Bɛr nè bwaa.	I donʼt want to eat food now.
Mɛɛmɛ̀ e ke ye mkuu.	I eat beans too.
Viseèe bta enjep ñgoèñ na a m fa seèe ñgá' aè yuu bebep ce seèe aè geèe aè mú nfeè' aèmboè a m yá ená yi yu yáánïì. AÈ ka ba yi aèmboè Nyúè, e ke fa seèe ñgá' njo' yuu bebep ce seèe aè geèe tá ñgá' anaè bo jaè' seèe tá seèe ba rara aèmboè ye ye yu naè.	For they indeed, for a few days, punished us as seemed good to them; but he for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe, beèe Farïìsïî, njobeè' wee ke duè aè mndap mloo, koñ aè rcu aè mnta' beâe bgoèrgoèr, wee baè' aè ntaa, koñ ená beèe a ce vú ce ca'ni weèe.	Woe to you Pharisees! For you love the best seats in the synagogues, and the greetings in the marketplaces.
Beèe wááwá a m cañse a du a súnïî. Bkúú ba beâe bgoèrgoèr, ba beèe ce a m ba btu neè bsoogáè, ba ñgaâa mbaèa, ba beèe ce a m túr ñger aè rgeèe buu, ba bkwaèa ba boo a m cañse a du a súni aè mmbúè', beèe mo' a súnïì njeptii myáá.	The kings of the earth, the princes, the commanding officers, the rich, the strong, and every slave and free person, hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains.
Jisoès aè ka' niñ aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, rla' wááwá li ci'tïì, beèe a ce bipshi enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu nda?”	"When he had come into Jerusalem, all the city was stirred up, saying, ""Who is this?"""
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè ker yá ma ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e ce suèu embe buèu. Mmbaè' vi m cete ye aèmboè cáè' ce ñwáè aè maè' aè nyor wa'a, ghuèghumbeèñ yi ba mbe yeâ tuè. Vi bsii vi m ce raa aèmboè nyúè ce e ke sañ na, mi mkuèu mi ba aèmboè mntiti mor wa'a.	I saw a mighty angel coming down out of the sky, clothed with a cloud. A rainbow was on his head. His face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire.
Weèr aè yá, a ce suñ beèe ená Taèr aè m tuu Muu yïì ená e ba ñwáè ce e be geèe tá ñgoèñ yi luêñ.	We have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son as the Savior of the world.
Woweèe a ka' kani yuu ce Pol aè m suñ woweèe, ce cáp ye, e kashïì vi bcáè' a laa enáê, “Máè laèa ya wáá, kwaè' weèe. Ká' e seè'ni na, m be ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè ba neè beèe enje jáá.”	"When they opposed him and blasphemed, he shook out his clothing and said to them, ""Your blood be on your own heads! I am clean. From now on, I will go to the Gentiles!"""
M ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm seè'ni na, tá m bo fa mbaèa neè beèe Nyúè ce a yu aèfo.	But now, I say, I am going to Jerusalem, serving the saints.
Woweèe a ku ma'shi yaèp keñ ba yaèp taê, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	They immediately left the boat and their father, and followed him.
E dù à rkoo zhii mbàa zhi betì à bghaa.	He went to take his money but it became an uproar.
Máè kuè'si woweèe aèmboè wáè m kuè'si máè naè, tá woweèe a bo ba ñwáè moè'sir aèmboè soè ku ba ñwáè moè'sir foñ naè.	The glory which you have given me, I have given to them; that they may be one, even as we are one;
AÈmboè yi ba ba yáánïì ená a fyáèáshi muu Abraèham ca ce Sataèn aè kur neè yañ aè bfeè' ncoèp-waami-aè-rrúèú na efa yi yañ nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè a?”	"Ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan had bound eighteen long years, be freed from this bondage on the Sabbath day?"""
M ce loo máná Tata Jisos Kraâis túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ.	The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
E m naèa wa'a, a ye leè' aè rlii Nyúè ce e ce cu aè nfeè' wááwá, aè ba ye ce e m geèe rbuu ba buu wááwá ce vi yu mbo, a gee ñgoèñ ba buu wááwá ce vi yu njo, a ker gee mdip ba buu wááwá ce vi yu njo. E m ye leè' enáê, “A be keèr caèasi nfeè' ka'.	and swore by him who lives forever and ever, who created heaven and the things that are in it, the earth and the things that are in it, and the sea and the things that are in it, that there will no longer be delay,
A m yá'ni ye buu kuu Tata Jisoès. E m laèa neè ntee-ñwáè, a yá'ni beèe buu aèmboè Jisoès yáánïì seê. Ka' yi m ba wa'a, e m ku riñ yi ba baptïìr yïì Joân caè'caè'.	This man had been instructed in the way of the Lord; and being fervent in spirit, he spoke and taught accurately the things concerning Jesus, although he knew only the baptism of John.
Beèe ce a m loèr woweèe aè rfaè' aèmboè aè nyúè ta naè, a vúê, a la' ñwáè wááwá mbúè mbaèa.	"When those who were hired at about the eleventh hour came, they each received a denarius.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	10	Beèe ce a m loèr woweèe aè rfaè' entombïì naè, a ka' vúè, a ce kwaè'shi ená a be laè' woweèe goèr caèa beèe wááwá, a ku la' woweèe foñ ba mbúè mbaèa aèmboè a m laè' bár beèe naè.	When the first came, they supposed that they would receive more; and they likewise each received a denarius.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	11	Woweèe a ka' koo, a súsú a kuu ñwáè nsuu,	When they received it, they murmured against the master of the household,
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	12	a laa enáê, ‘Beèe ce wáè ba lor elúèsimbuèu naè a ba ku fa' ba aè awaè moè'sir, wáè ku la' weèr ce weèr aè faè' aè noèñ bïìi, nyúè aè too weèr na weèr woweèe yáánïì.’	saying, 'These last have spent one hour, and you have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the scorching heat!'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	20	13	E beesïì a laa neè moè' efa woweèe enáê, ‘Ñkaraè, máè geèe ba yuu mo' bebep neè wáè ka'. Mboè wáè ba byemi ená aè be koo mbúè mbaèa aè noèñ a?	But he answered one of them, 'Friend, I am doing you no wrong. Didn't you agree with me for a denarius?"
À kaʼ coʼ baa embe waami, bɛtì ntuufu.	If you remove two from eight, remains six.
tá weèe bo yeñger keèr noñger mbe yaè tábuèr embe máâ nto', cu mbe bkaèbaèraè' ce sa' mntáè' Isráèl ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	"that you may eat and drink at my table in my Kingdom. You will sit on thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel."""
Geewa'a, e ka' baè' aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, beâe aè ñgoâñ Galeèle a konïì ye boèñboñ seê, njobeè' woweèe foñ a m duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap, a yá buu ce Jisoès aè m geèe aè nfeè' ce a m ce ye ñkaè' anaè.	So when he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
Ñgwañkúñwáè aè ka' túr boo káè mmbishïì áè, baná boo ca káè mmbishïì ca áè, a ba ba beèe entombïì aè rjaè' ye. Woweèe a ka' ja' ye baná woweèe a ce geèe yuu ce woweèe a yá'ni a kuu Nyúè, tá yi ba ená njeèe aè rúèú a ce nyoñ muu. Cena yu yuu ce Nyúè e ke yu' rboèñ aègho.	But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them learn first to show piety towards their own family, and to repay their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.
Beèe mo' efa múè ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, wáè laèa boèñboñ.”	"Some of the scribes answered, ""Teacher, you speak well."""
Pitaè aè ka' kuè bii ce laèa, Yú' Rara yi suu mbenduè beèe wááwá ce a m yu' blaèa ca.	While Peter was still speaking these words, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.
Yànà a yuu ghaghaʼ à rkonì sê.	That is a very difficult thing to get.
E kap njàp a kur à fù.	She has harvested vegetables and has tied in a leaf.
Bláá ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ba bláá beèe Nyúè moè' wááwá, ker ba bláá beèe wááwá ce a yúshi njep ñgoèñ na, vi yu mbe tu rla' anaè.”	"In her was found the blood of prophets and of saints, and of all who have been slain on the earth."""
Woweèe a be yá bsii Nyúè, tá a sañ rlii Nyúè nje waâp mnsaèpsi.	They will see his face, and his name will be on their foreheads.
Muunje ca à m̀ bashi mɛ̀, mɛ̀ lor à ŋgwa.	This girl stuck to me and I married her.
a ker fa seèe ncoèo ce e ce duèñshi ená seèe yu yïì beèe. E fa yi Yú' njep seâe mntee, yi ba aèmboè yuu ce e tár neè seèe ená seèe be koni buu wááwá ce e kaè' ená e be keè fa neè seèe.	who also sealed us, and gave us the down payment of the Spirit in our hearts.
Joân aè ka' yá, a suñ beèe. E m sañ ba blaèa ce vi m loè ese Nyúè, Jisoès aè suñ ye.	who testified to God's word, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, about everything that he saw.
Yi yu mini ená e m goè'si aè nfeè' ce a m taa ye mbe kïìntaa. Geewa'a, e cu nteèe seè'ni aè ñger Nyúè. AÈmboè weèr yu bgoè'sïì foñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis aè m ba naè, baná weèr be cu bteèe foñ weèr Jisos Kraâis weèe aè ñger Nyúè, a ce faè' neè weèe neè ñger-ñwáè.	For he was crucified through weakness, yet he lives through the power of God. For we also are weak in him, but we will live with him through the power of God toward you.
Máè yá aèmboè nyaèa ce e m fúú enjep roè naè aè vúè aèbee a bkúú enjep ñgoèñ na ker ba bsoogáè ce a yu njeptii bkúú ca. Woweèe a m vúè aèbee tá a bo maè' bïìr a ñwáè ce e m cu mbe nyaèabaèraâ' mbúú naè ba bsoogáè ce a m ba njep yeâ tïìi.	I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies, gathered together to make war against him who sat on the horse, and against his army.
Ñwáè moè' yu ce e rïìñ yïì ma káè yïì ta ka'. A laèa yuu mo' aèmboè yi raèraè ka'. Seèe rïìñ nfeè' a m bi ye káè nfeè' ce e m kwe ka'. E yu aèmboè muu Nyúè, e yu ñwáè tañshi tañshïì nfeseè.	without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God), remains a priest continually.
Kèseʼ e ke koo ŋwɛ̀ a fa ye mdip e nô.	When someone has hiccups, he is given water to drink.
njobeè' wo blaèa vi be keèe fúr wáè efa mnsa' tá wo blaèa vi gee tá aè gwe mnsa'.”	"For by your words you will be justified, and by your words you will be condemned."""
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a vú a yá ye, a laa enáê, “Waè' aè rïìñ wáná beèe Farïìsi a ba yu' yuu ce wáè ba laa naè, ntee yi bep woweèe se a?”	"Then the disciples came, and said to him, ""Do you know that the Pharisees were offended, when they heard this saying?"""
A m baèptir ye ker ba beèe embe yeâ ndaèp, a ka' mïìsi, e be weèr ená weèr vú mbe yeâ ndaèp. E m laèa enáê, “Weèe aè ka' yá neè mini-ñwáè ená máè byemi neè Tataê, weèe vú cu mbe máâ ndaèp.” E m laèa neè weèr caar, weèr woweèe a duê.	"When she and her household were baptized, she begged us, saying, ""If you have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and stay."" So she persuaded us."
A ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a kuushïì yuu ce e m laèa anaè.	They remembered his words,
Ka' cu, ñwáè moè' ce a m ce too ená Jairoès aè vúê. E m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr embe ndaèp rloo. E m vúè a gwe njeptii Jisoès a bu' mmbo neè ye ená e vú mbe yeâ ndaèp,	Behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. He fell down at Jesus' feet, and begged him to come into his house,
Seèe yoñshi Tata Nyúè ce e ke fa seèe ñger aè rso buu bbebep, ker ba rkwe, njïì enjep Jisos Kraêis.	But thanks be to God, who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Judaès ce e m fyeèni ye naè, aè ka' yá ená a teni mnsa' ená a yú Jisoès, a kupse yi ntee, a lor mbaèa mntaar caè, a du aègho, a kúsi neè beâe bgoèrgoèr ba bleebeèe caè,	Then Judas, who betrayed him, when he saw that Jesus was condemned, felt remorse, and brought back the thirty pieces of silver to the chief priests and elders,
Caè'ni neè bfúr wee, baa woweèe nje nyoèr aè rlii Jisoès.	Greet one another with a holy kiss.
Jisoès aè m maè' ñgaèa ca neè woweèe foñ enáê, “AÈde' ñwáè saa cáâ' fi la' mbenduè cáâ' rúèú tarshi ka'. E ka' gee wa'a, baná a saèa cáè' fi anaè aè cicïì. Wáè ka' tar yi mbenduè yïû rúèú, yi ghááte ka'.	"He also told a parable to them. ""No one puts a piece from a new garment on an old garment, or else he will tear the new, and also the piece from the new will not match the old."
Nfuʼ à kɛ̀ʼshi rkì.	Nfuh has formed segment on the pole.
A ka' baè', a lor mruè' a fiñshi neè máêr, a fa neè Jisoès ená e no, e kanïì.	They offered him wine mixed with myrrh to drink, but he didn't take it.
Ñwáè moè' aè m ba a ce yañ, ce a too ye ená Lasoèroès. E m ce cu aè rla' Bátanïì a Máèári ba Maataè ce aè m ba bjar vi.	Now a certain man was sick, Lazarus from Bethany, of the village of Mary and her sister, Martha.
Ká' e seè'ni na, Muu Ñwáè be cu aè rkoo maè' Nyúè ce e túr ñger wááwá.”	"From now on, the Son of Man will be seated at the right hand of the power of God."""
Túè' aè ka' raa, Agripaè ba Báènis a vú neè foèo-ñwáè, a niñ mbe ndaèp rcuteè. A m niñ mbo a beèe ce a m ba btu neè bsoogáè, ba beâe bgoèrgoâr aè rla' ca. Fástoès aè laêa, a vú neè Poêl.	So on the next day, when Agrippa and Bernice had come with great pomp, and they had entered into the place of hearing with the commanding officers and principal men of the city, at the command of Festus, Paul was brought in.
Mɛ̀ lʉ̀shi zhi ghɛ̂ɛ.	I have rested enough.
Be ba aè nfeè' ce máè siñsi yaèp buu bbebep, tá yi ba ená máè geèe yuu ce máè m ye leè' máná m be geèe naè.”	"This is my covenant to them, when I will take away their sins."""
E tʉʉ nyàa, a koo ntoʼnì ŋgùŋ.	He has shot an animal, and has taken half the chest.
M yu gaây mboèñmboñ. M rïìñ ya njeèe, ya njeèe yi riñ máè.	I am the good shepherd. I know my own, and I'm known by my own;
Geewa'a, seèe ka' ce jáèr aè rraa, aèmboè e yu aè rraa, seèe wááwá ba aèbee, bláá Jisoès ce Muu yïì vi su'sïì seèe efa yïìseèe buu bbebep.	But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin.
Tá ñwáè ce e túr rfaè' aè rgeèe njep ñgoèñ na, káè yu ba njáèá rfaè' ká, cu aèmboè ñwáè ce e túr lá mkwaè'shïì aè buu anaè ka' wa'a, njobeè' ñgoèñ ca yi ce mïì.	and those who use the world, as not using it to the fullest. For the mode of this world passes away.
Ñwáè wááwá efa seâe mú gee ba yuu ce nyor boñ nfúr yïì tá nfúr yïì bo tap foñ.	Let each one of us please his neighbor for that which is good, to be building him up.
E beesïì enáê, ‘Yi yu wa' ka', ta Abraèhaêm, ñwáè aè ka' lo ba embaè yir, du suñ woweèe, woweèe a ku kupse ma' yaèp buu bbebep.’	"He said, 'No, father Abraham, but if one goes to them from the dead, they will repent.'
Luke	Luêk	16	31	Abraèham aè laa enáê, ‘Woweèe a ka' tá yu' yuu ce a ce beè' embe ñwaâ' Musïìs ba ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ka', baná ñwáè aè ka' ba fúú efa rkwe, woweèe a byemïì yuu ce ñgaèñ be suñ woweèe ka'.’ ”	He said to him, 'If they don't listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if one rises from the dead.'"""
A mboè yi be keè ba wa'a aè noèñ ce Nyúè be fa ñger neè Jisos Kraâis tá e sa' beèe a yeâ tuè, teni wap mnsa' naè. E be sa' woweèe aè buu wááwá ce woweèe a m ce geèe aè bsúèti aèmboè m ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, a ce suñ beèe naè.	in the day when God will judge the secrets of men, according to my Good News, by Jesus Christ.
Njeŋwɛ̀ ca à yɛ zhii ŋwɛɛ.	This woman is under her menstrual period.
E ke làa blàa buu kùyɛɛ.	He usually speaks what is truthful.
Sèe kèse btu kwaʼshi àgho.	Letʼs unite and think about it.
E ciisïì neè woweèe tatap seê, ená woweèe a fa suñ ñwáè moè' ka',	But he warned them, and commanded them to tell this to no one,
Tata aè laa enáê, “Yu' yuu ce ñwáè nsa' mnsa' ce e m ba ñwáè mnaèñ na aè m laèa.	"The Lord said, ""Listen to what the unrighteous judge says."
Nyúè ce ko'si li rshentee njobeè' buu wááwá ce aède' beèe a riñ aèmboè ye vi yu brara neè woweèe. Nyúè ye ye aè duèñshi woweèe buu anaè.	because that which is known of God is revealed in them, for God revealed it to them.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m ye leè' ená aède' woweèe a vú ba' fa yeâ dïû' rlúèshïì ka' naè, e m ye leè' anaè aètu weèe ká? AÈ m ba beèe ce a m teèe tu neè Nyúè naè.	To whom did he swear that they wouldn't enter into his rest, but to those who were disobedient?
Máè m ba aè rla' Áfásoès, beâe aèfo a fa máè ñgá' seê. Beèe a m loè beeñger a vú mbe máâ nduè, a ce geèe ñgeèe aèmboè mnyaèa wa'a. Yi m ba ba ená beèe a be fúú efa rkwe ka', yaè sá' aè ba ba ká? Yi ba ba wa'a, yi ba ba boèñboñ ená m laa neè weèe enáê, “Seèe yeñger ce noñger njobeè' ku báti nfeè' múcaèr tá seèe kweñger.”	"If I fought with animals at Ephesus for human purposes, what does it profit me? If the dead are not raised, then ""let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die."""
Geewa'a, mnoèñ vi ka' baâ' btaar, Nyúè aè fúr ye efa rkwe, a gee e yáátïì aèwañ.	God raised him up the third day, and gave him to be revealed,
“Bipshi neè tá a bo fa neè weèe. Roèo neè tá weèe bo yá. Kuèushi neè tá a bo múè' keèñ neè weèe.	"Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and you will find. Knock, and it will be opened for you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	8	Yi yu wa' njobeè' ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' ce loo, baná e be koni. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce roèo, baná e be yá. Ñwáè ce e ka' ce kuèushi, baná a be múè' keèñ neè ye.	For everyone who asks receives. He who seeks finds. To him who knocks it will be opened.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	9	Ñwáè efa weâe mú ce muu yïì aè ka' loo bráêd, e fa ye ba luèr yu nda?	Or who is there among you, who, if his son asks him for bread, will give him a stone?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	10	Waè' muu aè ka' loo nca, e fa ye ba nyo a?	Or if he asks for a fish, who will give him a serpent?
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	11	Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, weèe ka' riñ aè rfa buu bboèñboñ neè boo wee, yi ba yi ká aèmboè yeè Ta embe buèu. Mboè e be fa yi buu bboèñboñ se neè beèe ce a loo ená e fa woweèe a?	If you then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your Father who is in heaven give good things to those who ask him!
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	12	Baná yuu ce weèe ka' ce koèñ ená beèe mo' a gee neè weèe, weèe gee yuu anaè neè beèe mo' foñ, njobeè' yi yu mbe ñwaâ' mncir ba mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè wa'a.	Therefore whatever you desire for men to do to you, you shall also do to them; for this is the law and the prophets.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	7	13	“Niñ njïû aè cuâu ñka' ce yi yu yi'seè, njobeè' cuâu ñka' ce yi yu báèbár ba nduunjïì ce yi yu báèbár yi ce duè ba aè dïì' rkwe ce nfeseè, beèe ce a ce niñ aè cuâu ñka' anaè a ba goèr.	Enter in by the narrow gate; for wide is the gate and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many are those who enter in by it."
M be naèti duè yá yaè taê, laèa neè ye enáê, Yaè taê, máè geèe yuu bebep neè Nyúè, ba neè wáè foñ,	"I will get up and go to my father, and will tell him, ""Father, I have sinned against heaven, and in your sight."
Beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a be lu'shi njobeè' beèe anaè a kweñger. Woweèe a be geèe ñkaè', ce lu'shi, ce fa beèe buu njobeè' beèe a mmbaa ce a m geèe beèe enjep ñgoèñ a yá ñgá' naè a kweñger.	Those who dwell on the earth rejoice over them, and they will be glad. They will give gifts to one another, because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth.
Yuu mo' yi yu ce weèr ce naèa tu aègho, a ke' ce tarni ka'. Yuu anaè yi yu ená weèr aè cu njep ñgoèñ na, lañlañ aè nfeè' weèr aè m ba a weâe mú neè ntee rara ba mini ce e loè ese Nyúè. Weèr aè cu wa'a ba neè bfee enjep ñgoèñ na ka', weèr aè cu ba njo' ntee boèñboñ ce Nyúè túr neè weèr.	For our boasting is this: the testimony of our conscience, that in holiness and sincerity of God, not in fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God we behaved ourselves in the world, and more abundantly toward you.
Ñwáè ce e ka' co' yuu mo' efa gho, baná Nyúè be maè'shi tá e ye mbaèñ ce ce yi ke fa ryoèñ, ce a suñ mbe ñwaè' ca naè ka'. E be maè'shi tá ñgaèñ niñ aè rla' Nyúè ce a sañ mbe ñwaè' ca foñ naè ka'.	If anyone takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, may God take away his part from the tree of life, and out of the holy city, which are written in this book.
E ka' laèa wa' mïìsi, a ma'shi beèe caè, a niñ mbe ndaèp. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du a yá ye mbo, a laa neè ye enáê, “Suñ ka weèr mbuèu efa ñgaèa ñke' ce yi m kuè' aè múè msañ naè.”	"Then Jesus sent the multitudes away, and went into the house. His disciples came to him, saying, ""Explain to us the parable of the darnel weeds of the field."""
Mɛ̀ sùʼsi mkùu mmaa.	I have washed my feet.
Bɛr nè mmaa njer rkìŋ.	Donʼt eat all the beans.
Bfúr waê, Nyúè aè m ká' weèe ená weèe bo ba yïì beèe. Baná weèe kwa'shi aèmboè ñwáè ce Jisoès yu. A ye ce e táá aètu Nyúè, a ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì efa buu Nyúè ce seèe aè byemi aègho.	Therefore, holy brothers, partakers of a heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus;
Pitaè aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, ka' ba wáè, aè laa tá m jár mbenduè rdip vúè yá wáè.”	"Peter answered him and said, ""Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the waters."""
A mboè yaè Ta embe buèu be geèe neè ñwáè wááwá efa weâe mú wa'a, ce weèe a ka' tá ce foèosi bfúr wee enje ntee ka'.”	"So my heavenly Father will also do to you, if you don't each forgive your brother from your hearts for his misdeeds."""
AÈ ka' keèr ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè moè', Jisoès aè du mbe ndaèp rloo, a ce yá'ni beèe mbo. Ñwáè moè' aè m ba mbo, li rkoo maè' li m kwe.	It also happened on another Sabbath that he entered into the synagogue and taught. There was a man there, and his right hand was withered.
“Ñwáè aè ka' vú a máâ mbuèu, ke' baa yïì ta ba yïì maê, ba ñgwa yïì, ba boo vi, ba bfúr vi ba bjar vi, ker ba neè yïì nyor-ñwáè foñ ka', baná aède' ñgaèñ ba ñwáè yá'ni yaè buu ka'.	"If anyone comes to me, and doesn't disregard his own father, mother, wife, children, brothers, and sisters, yes, and his own life also, he can't be my disciple.
Luke	Luêk	14	27	Ñwáè ce e ka' tá byáè' yi kïìntaa, vúè fa máâ mbuèu ka', baná aède' ñgaèñ ba ñwáè yá'ni yaè buu ka'.	Whoever doesn't bear his own cross, and come after me, can't be my disciple.
Luke	Luêk	14	28	Ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú ka' ce koèñ aè rbaè'ri ndap ce e saèp mbekïì seê, baná e be cu aè nsheè, kwaè'shi aèmboè mbaèa ce aède' e ba'rïì ndap anaè aègho tá e bo yá ená e túr buu ce aède' e ba'ri ndap anaè aègho misi lá,	For which of you, desiring to build a tower, doesn't first sit down and count the cost, to see if he has enough to complete it?
Luke	Luêk	14	29	buwa'laèr, e ka' boo kuâu ndap, lo moo aè rbaè'ri ndap mïìsi laèr, baná beèe ce a ka' yá ndap anaè a be vúèshi ye ce laèa enáê,	Or perhaps, when he has laid a foundation, and is not able to finish, everyone who sees begins to mock him,
Luke	Luêk	14	30	‘Ñwáè ca aè m káè' a ce baè'ri ndap a moo aè rmïìsi laèr.’	saying, 'This man began to build, and wasn't able to finish.'
Luke	Luêk	14	31	Yi yu foñ ená ñkúú aè ka' ce duè aè rmaè' bïìr, túr bsoogáè ncúèkïì rúêú, ñkúú ce a ye a be maè' bïìr túr yi bsoogáè ncúèkïì mmbaa, baná e be káè' entombïì cu aè nsheè, kwaè'shi ená yi ñger yi ghááte aè rmaè' bïìr a ñkúú anaè lá.	Or what king, as he goes to encounter another king in war, will not sit down first and consider whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand?
Luke	Luêk	14	32	E ka' yá ená e túr ñger aè rmaè' bïìr a ye ka', baná e be tuu beèe tá a du yá ñkúú anaè aè nfeè' ce e ku bii aènjïìsaèp, laèa neè ye ená a ye a seesi seèesi ba cuâu mo'sir, borni bïìr.	Or else, while the other is yet a great way off, he sends an envoy, and asks for conditions of peace.
Luke	Luêk	14	33	Yi ku ba wa' foñ neè weèe. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá maè'shi yïì buu wááwá ce e túr ka', baná aède' ñgaèñ ba ñwáè yá'ni yaè buu ka'.	So therefore whoever of you who doesn't renounce all that he has, he can't be my disciple.
Luke	Luêk	14	34	“Mgwañ mi boèñ, geewa'a, mi ka' cir, aède' a gee eká mi ka' ker leêe?	Salt is good, but if the salt becomes flat and tasteless, with what do you season it?
Luke	Luêk	14	35	Mi ka' cir, baná mi be keèr túr rfaè' mo' neè nshe káè neè maènyo ka'. A be loèr mi maè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	It is fit neither for the soil nor for the manure pile. It is thrown out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear."
Nǒŋtʉʼ ce sò be dù zhi ghɛɛte a?	Has the day that we have to go come?
E yu mbena ka'. E fúú efa rkwe. Kuushi neè yuu ce e m laèa neè weèe aè nfeè' ce e m ba aè ñgoâñ Galeèle enáê,	He isn't here, but is risen. Remember what he told you when he was still in Galilee,
Yi ka' ba wa'a, máè ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe fa sáè njo' ñgá' ce m ce yá fa weâe btuè na ka'. Weèe be koni sá' efa ñgá' anaè.	Therefore I ask that you may not lose heart at my troubles for you, which are your glory.
Ku ba yuu yi mo'sir ca ce máè rïìñ máná máè m laèa mbe kansuèr: Máè m laèa mánáê, “Máè táá mbe kansuèr ntïìni na njobeè' máè byemi máná beèe ce a kweñger a be keè fúú efa rkwe.”	"unless it is for this one thing that I cried standing among them, 'Concerning the resurrection of the dead I am being judged before you today!'"""
Yuu máè rïìñ caè'caè' yi yu ená Yú' Rara yi ce suñ máè aè bbu' mla' wááwá ce m ce duè ená m be duè shañ, keèr yá ñgá'.	except that the Holy Spirit testifies in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions wait for me.
Nyor ku ba moè'sir, a túr mñgúè' nyor jáá jáèá jáá, ñgúè' nyor wááwá aè túr li rfaè'.	For even as we have many members in one body, and all the members don't have the same function,
Beèe Farïìsi a laa yap enáê, “E ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger ñkúú mnyúâmkaè'.”	"But the Pharisees said, ""By the prince of the demons, he casts out demons."""
Ku' ñgaâa byañ a m noèñte aè btaèp anaè. Beèe mo' efa woweèe a m feèp, beèe mo' a ba mntáèñ, mñgúè' nyor mmo' vi kweñgeèr beèe mo'. [Woweèe a m cu a ce keè' nfeè' ce túè be káè' ce bañti.	In these lay a great multitude of those who were sick, blind, lame, or paralyzed, waiting for the moving of the water;
AÈ ka' ba njo' ku' li rboèñ, seèe wááwá aè konïì bghoènïì ese ye ñkaèraè' aèñgoo.	From his fullness we all received grace upon grace.
ntáè' Simïìyoèn, ntáè' Lávïì, ntáè' Esakaè,	of the tribe of Simeon twelve thousand, of the tribe of Levi twelve thousand, of the tribe of Issachar twelve thousand,
Njáèá yuu ce yi koni weèe na yu ba njáèá ká? Mboè weèe túr mndap ce wee ke fúú embo weèe aè banïì yeñger, a ker noñger a? Yi yu boèñboñ ená weèe lor cor Nyúè aè yuu cicïì ker gee tá rïìtu yi koo beèe ce a buu byee ba buu mno ka'. Yuu ce m be laèa neè weèe yu ká? Waè' m be yoèñshi weèe a? Ka', aède' m yoñshïì weèe ka'.	What, don't you have houses to eat and to drink in? Or do you despise God's assembly, and put them to shame who don't have? What shall I tell you? Shall I praise you? In this I don't praise you.
Yi nta' yi be kuè ce duè entombïì, tá ya yi ce kúti njïìnjïì.	He must increase, but I must decrease.
Nfò à ŋaʼ cùu enɛ à rlàa yuu mɛ̀ cir ye.	Nfor opened his mouth to say something and I hindered him from speaking.
njobeè' aède' bláá naè' ba bláá mbú vi siñsïì buu bbebep anaè ka'.	For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins.
AÈde' ñwáè ncápshi nyor gee yuu ce yi yu yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	for the anger of man doesn't produce the righteousness of God.
Túè' aè ka' raa, e fúr mbaèa baa, a fa neè ñwáè ce e m ce faè' mbo, a laa neè ye enáê, ‘Keè'ni ye boèñboñ, ka' ba ená mbaèa ca yi sáè, wáè kyeseè mbaèa mo', baná m be kúti tá m kúúsi yi neè wáè.’	On the next day, when he departed, he took out two denarii, and gave them to the host, and said to him, 'Take care of him. Whatever you spend beyond that, I will repay you when I return.'
A ka' vúè, a ko'shi aègee Jisoès, a laa enáê, “Rabaèi”, a baa ye nje nyoèr.	"When he had come, immediately he came to him, and said, ""Rabbi! Rabbi!"" and kissed him."
Bfúr mo' a m ba beèe nsaèambaê. Ñwáâ nlee aè loèr ñgwa a bi boo a ye ka', a kwe.	There were therefore seven brothers. The first took a wife, and died childless.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, máè yá yuu mo' ce e geèe ce máè ba sañ suñ Tata ka'. A mbuèu ce máè vúè neè ye njep weâe tïìi, lañlañ njeptii wáè ce ñkúú Agripaè, tá seâe ce fyá' nje múè mnsa' ca tá m bo túr yuu ce m sañ.	Of whom I have no certain thing to write to my lord. Therefore I have brought him forth before you, and especially before you, King Agrippa, that, after examination, I may have something to write.
Baná seèe táá tatap, lá mmir ba mbenduè buu ce seèe aè byemi wáá ená vi be koni naè. Seèe fa tarni ka' njobeè' aède' Nyúè buu efa rgeèe yuu ce e m kaè' ka'.	let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering; for he who promised is faithful.
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' a m vúè neè muu mbe Ndaèp Nyúè anaè, ye ye aè ku tose foñ, a yoñshi Nyúè, a laa aèmboè muu ca neè beèe wááwá ce a m ce keè' ená Nyúè fúr rla' Jáèrusaláèm efa ñgá'.	Coming up at that very hour, she gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who were looking for redemption in Jerusalem.
njobeè' a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, ‘Nyúè be laèa tá vi bcïìndap a ke'ni wáè.’	for it is written, 'He will put his angels in charge of you, to guard you;'
Saimúèn ye ye aè m byemi, a ka' baèptir ye, e ku ce kar a Feleêp. E ka' yá mncoèo ba buu bghagha' ce Felep aè m geèe, e bááñgeèr seê.	Simon himself also believed. Being baptized, he continued with Philip. Seeing signs and great miracles occurring, he was amazed.
Wáè ce aè ce naèa nyor ená a wáè ñwáè Juês, aè ce laèa ená aè yu yáánïì njobeè' aè rïìñ mncir, a ce naèa nyor ená aè rïìñ Nyúè jáá,	Indeed you bear the name of a Jew, and rest on the law, and glory in God,
Jisoès aè naa bo a joo ye aègho, a laa enáê, “M ce koèñ wa'a, keè'se, ba nrara.” E ka' laèa wa'a, msaèasïì mi ku lo yeâ aè nyoèr.	"He stretched out his hand, and touched him, saying, ""I want to. Be made clean."" Immediately the leprosy left him."
Beèe mo' efa waâp mú a lo la' kuèu du aè mndap beèe mo', bo' bbyeèñge ce a yu blúr a ce wáp buu njo' yaèp buu bbebep ce woweèe a jep njep múè mo.	For some of these are people who creep into houses, and take captive gullible women loaded down with sins, led away by various lusts,
Máè rïìñ dïì' ce weèe ce cu, aè dïì' ce Sataèn cu mbe kaèbaèraè'. Weèe aè kani máè efa rba yeè ñkúú ka'. A m yú Antipaès ce e m byemi neè máè njobeè' e m suñ beèe ená e ce duè a máâ mbuèu. Ka' a m yú ye ba faèdïì' weèe ce cu, aè ba dïì' ce Sataèn ye ye ce cu wa'a, weèe aè ku túr ntee njep máè.	"I know your works and where you dwell, where Satan's throne is. You hold firmly to my name, and didn't deny my faith in the days of Antipas my witness, my faithful one, who was killed among you, where Satan dwells.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	14	Ka' weèe ku túr ntee njep máè wa'a, weèe ce geèe buu moè', aè ba buu ce máè koèñ ka'. Beèe mo' a yu a weâe mú ce a ce geèe ba buu ce Balaèm aè m yá'ni beèe ená a geêe. E m yá'ni Balaèk ená e bo' beâe aè to' Isráèl tá a ye byee ce a fa neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na ker ce sakïî.	But I have a few things against you, because you have there some who hold the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to throw a stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to idols, and to commit sexual immorality.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	15	Beèe mo' a yu a weâe mú foñ ce a ce duè ba aèmbuèu ryá'nïì li Nikoèlaès.	So you also have some who hold to the teaching of the Nicolaitans likewise.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	16	Baná weèe kupse, ma' yeè buu bbebep buwa'laèr m vú nfeè' múcaèr seê, lor saè' mbyáèráñ ce m túr kuè cuèu, seèe ma' bïìr.	Repent therefore, or else I am coming to you quickly, and I will make war against them with the sword of my mouth.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	17	Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè' ñgaèñ yu' yuu ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce laèa neè bcor wááwá. Ñwáè ce e ka' táá tatap caa rmoèoshïì, baná m be fa ye manaè ce a m loèr a súti naè. M be fa ye luâr mbúú ce a sañ rlii rfi mbo, aè ba ba rlii ce be kuè rïìñ ñwáè ce e túr luèr anaè.’ ”	He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies. To him who overcomes, to him I will give of the hidden manna, and I will give him a white stone, and on the stone a new name written, which no one knows but he who receives it.
Revelation	Kuu Buu Ce Vi Be Keè Koni	2	18	Ñwáè ce máè m yá naè aè laa neè máè enáê, “Sañ ñwaè' neè ncïìndap embe cor aè rla' Taèitiraè enáê, ‘Cena yu blaèa ce vi loè ese muu Nyúè ce mi mmir mi ce raa aèmboè mcuèñ mor, mi mkuu mi ce laè'ñger aèmboè co' ce ñgaâa ntoèo nlaèa a kupshi wa'a.	To the angel of the assembly in Thyatira write: ""The Son of God, who has his eyes like a flame of fire, and his feet are like burnished brass, says these things:"
À kaʼ laʼ rkap ŋwɛ̀ banɛ wɛ̀ yuu ye.	If you pay somebodyʼs dowry therefore you have bought her.
E yu ñwáè tañshi tañshïì, a ke' ba ba aèmboè ncir kuu raèraè ñwáè tañshi tañshïì yi ce laèa ka'. E yu ñwáè tañshi tañshïì njobeè' e túr ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Ku ba ñger efa ryoèñ anaè ce e geèe e ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì.	who has been made, not after the law of a fleshly commandment, but after the power of an endless life:
“Be ba aè mnoèñ ce ñgá' ca aè caa tá nyúè liiti, tá ñwáá yi ker sañ ka'.	But in those days, after that oppression, the sun will be darkened, the moon will not give its light,
Ntaandʉŋ yu njeŋwɛ̌ nfàŋ nfaŋ.	Ntaandung is a bulky and powerful woman.
“Kúti fa wáâ laè' du suñ beèe yuu ce Nyúè aè geèe neè wáè.” Ñwáè anaè aè du a jár aè rla' anaè wááwá a ce suñ beèe yuu ce Jisoès aè geèe neè ye.	Return to your house, and declare what great things God has done for you. He went his way, proclaiming throughout the whole city what great things Jesus had done for him.
Máè yá neè ma mmir ená e ce faè' tatap seê, tá e bo jaè' weèe, jaè' beâe aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè ker ba beâe aè rla' Hïìrapolïìs.	For I testify about him, that he has great zeal for you, and for those in Laodicea, and for those in Hierapolis.
Bfúr waê, yi ka' ba wa'a, m ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe aè ba láè ntee goèr ba aè rsuñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe weèe aè rïîñ. Yi ka' ba ne wa'a, weèe fa kani ená beèe mo' efa weâe mú ce a rïìñ aè rlaèa aè li ce a m be yá'ni ka' naè a fa laèa ka'.	Therefore, brothers, desire earnestly to prophesy, and don't forbid speaking with other languages.
Fa neè yuu ce weèe aè ba fa neè ñwáè wááwá. Káè yu mbaâa baèraè' áè, káè yu mbaèa ce a laèa ená aè la' aètu buu ce wáè túr áè, laè' yuu ce wáè ba laè'. Wáp beèe ce wáè ba wáp, yu'ni neè beèe ce wáè ba yu'ni neè woweèe.	Give therefore to everyone what you owe: taxes to whom taxes are due; customs to whom customs; respect to whom respect; honor to whom honor.
Kep ntaŋguu anà.	Break that stick.
Woweèe a vúshïì ye, njobeè' woweèe a m rïìñ ená muu anaè aè kwe.	They were ridiculing him, knowing that she was dead.
A ñkaèraè' taar seè'ni aèmboè Jisoès aè m duèñshi yïì nyor neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, káâ' aè nfeè' ce e m fúú efa rkwe.	This is now the third time that Jesus was revealed to his disciples, after he had risen from the dead.
Mbʉ zhi ke zhe mjɛɛ tàtà sê.	Goats chew grass for a very long time.
Yi yu wa' ka', m ce suñ weèe ená weèe aè ka' tá kupse, maè' yeè buu bbebep ka', baná weèe wááwá be kweñger wa' foñ.	I tell you, no, but unless you repent, you will all perish in the same way.
Bfee vi ka' vúè ye mbo, e laa neè yïì nyor enáê, ‘Ñgaâa mfaè' ce yaè ta e ke laè', ce a ke ye byee vi ce gha' woweèe, a yu beèe a m sá', máè cu ya mbena ce kwe njeè!	But when he came to himself he said, 'How many hired servants of my father's have bread enough to spare, and I'm dying with hunger!
Fa keè geèe ñgeèe rnsuèu ka'. Geèe ba ñgeâe yáánïì, foosi neè Tata Nyúè, túr ntee rkoèñnïì ba ntee cumúnyañ. Wá geèe wa'a, yi ba ená aè ce geèe aèmboè beèe wááwá ce a ce ká' rlii Jisoès neè ntee rara a ce geèe naè.	Flee from youthful lusts; but pursue righteousness, faith, love, and peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart.
A be yá yaèp faèa kuèu buu bbebep njobeè' woweèe a byemi neè máè ka'.	about sin, because they don't believe in me;
E m yu' nsuñ Jisoès, a vú a niñ mbe múè beèe, a vú mbe yeâ njïì, a joo ye cáè',	having heard the things concerning Jesus, came up behind him in the crowd, and touched his clothes.
AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' ce Hároèd aè m ba ñkúú aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, ñwáè tañshi tañshïì moè' aè ba, a ce too ená Saèkaèriyaè. AÈ m ba ñwáè embe ñgoo ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì embe ndaèp AÈbijaè. A m ce too ñgwa yïì ená ÁÈlisabáèt. Ye ye aè m ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Ároèn ce aè m ba ñwáè tañshi tañshïì.	There was in the days of Herod, the king of Judea, a certain priest named Zacharias, of the priestly division of Abijah. He had a wife of the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
Woweèe a fa ye tete nca ce a m laa.	They gave him a piece of a broiled fish and some honeycomb.
Máè m laèa enjep máâ ntee ená m be kuè feè'shi ba aèmboè Jisos Kraâis caè'caè', suñ weèe aèmboè a m taa ye mbe kïìntaa.	For I determined not to know anything among you, except Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
Mñguu vi fúú embe múè njemor anaè a suu njep ñgoèñ. A m fa mñguu anaè ñger ená vi tashi beèe aèmboè nyobsaa enjep ñgoèñ na wa'a.	Then out of the smoke came forth locusts on the earth, and power was given to them, as the scorpions of the earth have power.
Ñgaâa ntaa enjep ñgoèñ na a be yá aèmboè rla' ca li ce she tá a taa mmbo mbe tuè war, njobeè' ñwáè ce e yuu yaèp buu ntaa be keèr ba ka'.	The merchants of the earth weep and mourn over her, for no one buys their merchandise any more;
Fuu à niŋ njer tar mtaaŋguu.	The mouse has entered within the logs.
Wèr à ba ce dù à rliisi mor a kaʼ bàʼ àfo mbeŋ à ba nè gwe a liisi.	We were going to put out a fire but when we got there, rain had fallen and put it out.
Ñwáè aè ka' ba ne ñwáè ñko'ndoñ seê, ker ce tañ buu aè bwer, baná e fa ce naa- tu, ce jepsi mini neè mnde' ená e yu ñwáè bfee ka'.	But if you have bitter jealousy and selfish ambition in your heart, don't boast and don't lie against the truth.
njobeè' e m laèa enáê, “Máè ka' ku joo ba yi cáè', m ku ke'se.”	"For she said, ""If I just touch his clothes, I will be made well."""
Jisoès aè m kúti mbe ndaèp. A ka' kúti, ku' beèe a ker kaarïì, a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe a ke' túr njïì aè rye yuu ka'.	The multitude came together again, so that they could not so much as eat bread.
Wer bta a m vúè aègho aèfa aè nfeè' ce Joshuèwaè aè m ba yap tu, woweèe a vú a so yap ñgoèñ, Nyúè aè juu beèe enje jáá ce a m ba aèfo a waâp bsii naè. Yi m cu neè woweèe caar a ba' mbe nfeè' yïì Dávïìd.	which also our fathers, in their turn, brought in with Joshua when they entered into the possession of the nations, whom God drove out before the face of our fathers, to the days of David,
Woweèe a m naèti a caa aè ñgoâñ Frijïìyaè ba Gaèláshaè, njobeè' Yú' Rara yi m kani woweèe efa rfeè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè ñgoâñ Áshaè.	When they had gone through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, they were forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia.
Bèe ker bii nòŋsi tu mbe mbuu kaʼ.	People are no more using that hard kind of a pillow.
koo weèe, ba boo wee ce weèe woweèe yu mbe ñka', lïìpshi aè nsheè. Woweèe a be maè'shi tá luèr moè' cu mbenduè moè' ka', njobeè' weèe aè m rïìñ nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m vúè aè rfúr weèe efa ñgá' naè ka'.”	"and will dash you and your children within you to the ground. They will not leave in you one stone on another, because you didn't know the time of your visitation."""
Weèe aè ka' foosi ñwáè efa yuu bebep ce ñgaèñ aè geèe, baná Nyúè be foèosi ye foñ. Weèe aè ka' tá foèosi ñwáè efa yuu bebep ce ñgaèñ aè geèe ka' baná Nyúè be foèosi ye foñ ka'.”	"Whoever's sins you forgive, they are forgiven them. Whoever's sins you retain, they have been retained."""
Ŋwɛ̀ kaʼ yaŋ ce còo banɛ bèe a be kɛ̀ʼ ce kwàʼshi sê.	If a person is sick and is groaning therefore people will begin to think too much.
Mkuŋ mi lùusi ŋkàʼ.	The mask dance has animated the occasion.
Máèári aè m táá aègee rsheè a ce war. E ka' ce war wa'a, a be'ti nyor a fyá' njep rsheè.	But Mary was standing outside at the tomb weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped and looked into the tomb,
E ka' laèa wa'a, woweèe a ku lá map mraa caè, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	Immediately they left their nets, and followed him.
Ñwáè ce e kwaè'shi ená e rïìñ buu seê, ñgaèñ aè be riñ buu aèmboè e ba rïìñ ka'.	But if anyone thinks that he knows anything, he doesn't yet know as he ought to know.
AÈde' ñwáè soogáâ mboèñmboñ cu aèmboè beâe aè laè' a ke cu naè ka', njobeè' yi yu ená e gee ba yuu ce yi boèñ yïì ñwáâ ñgoèr.	No soldier on duty entangles himself in the affairs of life, that he may please him who enrolled him as a soldier.
Vúè neè aègee Nyúè tá ye ye bo vúè a weâe geñ, weèe ce ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, fúr neè me mmbo enjep múè buu bbebep, ñgaâa rtarnïì, fa neè wee mntee neè Nyúè.	Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you double-minded.
Màsà à m koo ndap anà àbtɛr.	Masa took that house on mortgage.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Duè, lo rbyemïì li gee wáè ke'seè.” E ku ká' a ce yá buu, a nati a du a yeâ mbuèu.	"Jesus said to him, ""Go your way. Your faith has made you well."" Immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way."
Tàta tʉr nfàŋ.	Tata is very powerful.
E m duè mbe buèu, a cu aè rkoo maè' Nyúè, bcïìndap Nyúè ba byú' wááwá ce vi túr ñger a ba njep yeâ tïìi.	who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being made subject to him.
Wɛ̀ ghashi ŋwàʼ anà njìnjì.	You have held that book the opposite way.
loo neè neè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá,	Pray without ceasing.
Ŋòʼ njàp gapshi nè boo.	Dish the soup and share among the children.
Bfúr waê, baná ñwáè wááwá ku ba a Nyúè, ce cu aèmboè e m ce cu aè nfeè' Nyúè aè m ká' ye.	Brothers, let each man, in whatever condition he was called, stay in that condition with God.
Nyúè yu moè'sir, ñwáè ce e yu mbetar Nyúè ba beèe, a ce geèe tá beèe a ba aèbee a Nyúè aèmboè seèe yu, aè ba moè'sir foñ. Ñwáè ca yu Jisos Kraâis ce e m ba ñwáè aèmboè seèe.	For there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,
Mɛ̀ tɛ̀ɛ ncàʼ à cɛ̀ʼ.	I have smeared my cloth with mud.
Woweèe a m ce ye byee aè mbuèuñkuèr, Sataèn aè banïì gee Judaès ce muu Saimún IÌskarïìyoèt aè ká' a ce kwaè'shi ená e be fyeèni Jisoès.	During supper, the devil having already put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, to betray him,
Ncïìndap Nyúè embenjïì mo aè fyáp rsoèñ li. E ka' fyáp, ma rkaèñsïì ce li m ce káti aèmboè rsuèsuèñ wa'a, li gwe embe buèu. Li m gweè mbenduè ñgúè' moè'sir efa ñgúè' taar efa mdip ker ba faèdïì' mdip mi ke fúú.	The third angel sounded, and a great star fell from the sky, burning like a torch, and it fell on one third of the rivers, and on the springs of the waters.
Yu ye ce e geèe seèe aè ce cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè. E m geèe beèe ce a yu Juês, ker ba beèe ce a yu Jus ka' a ba ñwáè moè'sir. E m loèr yïì nyor a ca'si buu ce vi m gaèpni seèe, a gee seèe aè banïì naè, aègho.	For he is our peace, who made both one, and broke down the middle wall of partition,
Baná weèe kuushi buu ce a yá'ni weèe, weèe aè byemïì naè. Geèe neè buu anaè, ker kupse ye ntee, buwa'laèr m lo búú weèe búèú aèmboè nyáèá wa'a. Weèe be rïìñ nfeè' ce m be vúè ka'.	Remember therefore how you have received and heard. Keep it, and repent. If therefore you won't watch, I will come as a thief, and you won't know what hour I will come upon you.
Muu wàa à kɛ̀ʼ a ce coʼ kùu.	My child has begun to walk.
a ka' ce kúti, a cu mbe yïì mutuè ce aè m ce súèñ ba mnyaèabaèraè', a ce beè' ñwaâ' AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè.	He was returning and sitting in his chariot, and was reading the prophet Isaiah.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Tu embo a yïû ñkwe Ruêm, rlii embo aè ba li foñ.” E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná weèe fa buu ñkúú neè ñkúú, fa vïû Nyúè neè Nyúè.”	"They said to him, ""Caesar's."" Then he said to them, ""Give therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's."""
Wèr à mʉ tee msaŋ nèŋkùr.	We harvested rice yesterday.
Ku' beèe a vúseè a ruu mbe ndaèp, fáñ yi ke' ba ka'. E fe'shïì blaâa Nyúè neè woweèe.	Immediately many were gathered together, so that there was no more room, not even around the door; and he spoke the word to them.
Woowèe a kùʼsi nsuŋ anà.	They have exaggerated that information.
Yòo yû?	I have sent my wife down the market.
Woweèe wááwá a natïì mbekïì, a lor Jisoès a du aègho a fa neè Pailáèt.	The whole company of them rose up and brought him before Pilate.
Beèe a m loèr ye aè yuu cicïì, a sa' vi mnsa' neè mnaèñ-ñwáè. Ñwáè moè' yu ce aède' e suñ aèmboè yi raèraè ka', njobeè' a tee li ryoèñ enjep ñgoèñ.”	"In his humiliation, his judgment was taken away. Who will declare His generation? For his life is taken from the earth."""
Tee mɛ̀ à ncùu.	Assist me in playing the drum.
Nduu yu tu neè ñgwa aèmboè Kraâis ye ye yu tu neè cor naè. Yu ye ce e geèe cor aè luêñ, cor ca aè ba yïì nyor.	For the husband is the head of the wife, and Christ also is the head of the assembly, being himself the savior of the body.
Jisoès aè ka' laèa buu ca, a naa mmir a ke' mbe buèu a laa enáê, “Taèr, nfeè' aè gháá. Kuè'si muu woè, tá muu woè ye ye bo kuè'si wáè.	"Jesus said these things, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, he said, ""Father, the time has come. Glorify your Son, that your Son may also glorify you;"
Ka' ba ená aède' weèe gee yuu ce yi ku ba múcaèr aèmboè yïì anaè ka', mluè mi ka' ce koo weèe aè bár buu mo' caè njoká?	If then you aren't able to do even the least things, why are you anxious about the rest?
Beèe ce a kweñger a ka' tá keè fúú efa rkwe ka', baná Nyúè aè m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe foñ ka'.	For if the dead aren't raised, neither has Christ been raised.
E ka' bii ce laèa, beèe mo' embe ndaèp Jairoès a vú neè ntuu ená muu yïì aè lá kwe, e fa keèr fa lá Jisoès ñgá' tá e vú aè cicïì ka'.	"While he was still speaking, people came from the synagogue ruler's house saying, ""Your daughter is dead. Why bother the Teacher any more?"""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná a m baèptir weèe ba aè njáâá ká?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “A m baèptir weèr ba neè baèptir yïì Joân.”	"He said, ""Into what then were you baptized?"" They said, ""Into John's baptism."""
Rumàn kʉ̀kʉ̀ ntuufu, ŋgoo baa, à làa enɛ .	.
Woweèe a m laèa a waâp mú enáê, “Seèe fa saèa cáè' ca ka', seèe ma' kaèñ tá seèe bo yá ñwáè ce saèaro ca be duè neè ye.” Cena yi m koni tá yi bo ghááte aèmboè a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “A m gaèp wa bcáè' a waâp mú, a ker ma' kaèñ tá a bo yá ñwáè ce yaè saèaro be duè neè ye.” Bsoogáè a m ku gee aèmboè a m sañ.	"Then they said to one another, ""Let's not tear it, but cast lots for it to decide whose it will be,"" that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, ""They parted my garments among them. For my cloak they cast lots."" Therefore the soldiers did these things."
Bfúr waê, m ka' vú aè rcaè'ni weèe, laa neè weèe ba aè li ce máè m be yá'ni ka', waè' aède' yïì anaè yi ja' weèe a? Ka' ba ená máè vúè a suñ weèe yuu mo' fi, káè a gee buu Nyúè vi ba rara neè weèe áè, káè a cep ntuu Nyúè neè weèe, káè a yá'ni weèe áè, yïì anaè yi be jaè' weèe.	But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking with other languages, what would I profit you, unless I speak to you either by way of revelation, or of knowledge, or of prophesying, or of teaching?
gháè', no buu vi koo, ñañ ker ba buu moè' ce vi ku ba aèmboè bca. M ce laèa neè weèe tatap aèmboè máè m laèa neè weèe naè, ená aède' beèe ce a ce geèe njáèá buu ca a konïì ñgúè' moè' efa kúú Nyúè ka'.	envyings, murders, drunkenness, orgies, and things like these; of which I forewarn you, even as I also forewarned you, that those who practice such things will not inherit the Kingdom of God.
“Rla' Sayoèn, fa wáp ka'. Yá yoè ñkúú aèmboè e ce vúè, a cu mbenduè muu jaèaki'.”	Don't be afraid, daughter of Zion. Behold, your King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt.
Loo neè neè Nyúè aè nfeè' wááwá. Weèe aè ka' ce loo wa'a, weèe ma'shi tá Yú' Rara yi gee tá weèe riñ aè rloo. Cu neè njo, ke' sá ka'. Loo neè neè beèe Nyúè wááwá aè nfeè' wááwá,	with all prayer and requests, praying at all times in the Spirit, and being watchful to this end in all perseverance and requests for all the saints:
A mbuèu ce Nyúè aè m ce máè ená m ba ñwáè rfeè'shïì ker ba ñwáè ntuu foñ. Yuu ce m ce laèa na yu yuu mini, m ce nya' ba mnde' ka'. Nyúè aè m ce máè wa'a tá m bo yá'ni beèe enje jáá yuu mini, tá woweèe a riñ foñ aèmboè aède' ñwáè byemïì neè Jisos Kraêis.	to which I was appointed a preacher and an apostle (I am telling the truth in Christ, not lying), a teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè suñ weèe wáá, weèe aè byemïì ka'. Buu ce m ce geèe aè rlii yaè Taê, vi ce duèñshi njáèá ñwáè ce m yu.	"Jesus answered them, ""I told you, and you don't believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about me."
Baná ñwáè efa boo a baa ca ce e m geèe yuu ce yïì ta aè m koèñ aè m ba nda?” Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Muu nlee.” Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ba bkwaèraè a ce duè mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè entombïì neè weèe.	"Which of the two did the will of his father?"" They said to him, ""The first."" Jesus said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you that the tax collectors and the prostitutes are entering into the Kingdom of God before you."
Weèr aè ka' loâ aèfo, a du a ba' aè rla' Fileèpaêi. AÈ m ba rla' ce baèraè' ce a m vúâ Rum a m ce sa'. AÈ m ba rla' rgoâr aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè. Weèr aè m cu aèfo aè mnoèñ aèñgoo.	and from there to Philippi, which is a city of Macedonia, the foremost of the district, a Roman colony. We were staying some days in this city.
Weèr aè m laèa neè weèe aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m ba naè wáá ená ñwáè ka' tá faè' ka', e fa ye ka'.	"For even when we were with you, we commanded you this: ""If anyone will not work, neither let him eat."""
ba Saimúèn ce e m ba moè' efa múè beèe Siloèt ba Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ce e m loè a fyeni Jisoès naè.	Simon the Canaanite; and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
Weèe aè m be yá Jisos Kraâis ka', a ku koñ ye. Weèe ce yá ye seè'ni na ka', a ku byemi neè ye, a ce lu'shi njáèá rlu'shïì ce aède' ñwáè suñ ka',	whom not having known you love; in whom, though now you don't see him, yet believing, you rejoice greatly with joy unspeakable and full of glory--
Rwáp li yu njep rkoèñnïì ka'. Yi yu ená rkoèñnïì ce li mïìsi li ke juèu rwáp, njobeè' rwáp li ke ba ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè rïìñ ená a be fa seèe ñgá' njobeè' seèe aè geèe yuu bebep. Baná rkoèñnïì lïû ñwáè ce e ce wáp buu li yu aè bábá'.	There is no fear in love; but perfect love casts out fear, because fear has punishment. He who fears is not made perfect in love.
Pol aè m ce koèñ ená a Timotïì a duê, yi ka' ba wa'a, a gee ye búè njobeè' Jus wááwá ce a m ba aè bdïì' anaè a m rïìñ ená yïì ta yu ñwáè Greês.	Paul wanted to have him go out with him, and he took and circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those parts; for they all knew that his father was a Greek.
E m laèa enáê, ‘AÈ ka' ba njobeè' máè m boo mbañruèñwáè ba njeñwáè, mbañruèñwáè be maè'shi yïì ta ba yïì maê, cu a ñgwa yïì, tá a ye a ba ñwáè moè'sir.’	and said, 'For this cause a man shall leave his father and mother, and shall join to his wife; and the two shall become one flesh?'
Wèr à dù njep Ntʉ̀, woowèe a du yap à cǔu moʼ.	We went to Ntfu but they went to a different direction.
Awá Yú' Nyúè yi lor Jisoès a du aègho aè ntee rïìñ tá Sataèn bo moèoshi ye.	Then Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, ñwáè nsuu aè laa neè yïì ñwáè rfaè' ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, ‘Ká' ñgaâa mfaè', la' woweèe. Káè' la' beèe ce máè ba lor elúèsimbuèu naè, ka' la' bár beèe, misi neè beèe ce máè ba lor entombïì naè.’	When evening had come, the lord of the vineyard said to his manager, 'Call the laborers and pay them their wages, beginning from the last to the first.'
Rjɛɛ anà rli tɛɛ kùyɛɛ.	That arrow is straight.
Woweèe a m tuu, a ba' aè ñgoâñ beèe Gáèrasaè. Wáè ka' táá aè ñgoèñ anaè, ñgoâñ Galeèle yi kútïì neèñguu roè.	They arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.
Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m ce caèa aè ñkúè msañ moè' nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, woweèe a ce tee tu msañ a ce ye.	It happened that he was going on the Sabbath day through the grain fields, and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears of grain.
Yáê, a maè' yeè Ndap Nyúè e táá mboèmmbo.	Behold, your house is left to you desolate.
Woweèe a ku bii tarni a ke' be byemi ka', a ce yu' rboèñ, a ce báèáñger seê. E bipshïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe túr yuu ye taâa a?”	"While they still didn't believe for joy, and wondered, he said to them, ""Do you have anything here to eat?"""
Yu'-neè rboèñ ce lu'shi njobeè' wee blaè' embe buèu vi yu goèr seê. Woweèe a m ku fa ñgá' neè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce a m ba entombïì neè weèe naè wa'a.	Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For that is how they persecuted the prophets who were before you.
Woweèe a m ce yoèp enáê, “Nyúè ghoni ñkúú ce e ce vúè aè rlii Tataê, tá cumúnyañ ba mbe buèu. Seèe ku'si Nyúè embe buèu.”	"saying, ""Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!"""
Buu ca aè ka' koni wa'a, ku' beèe aè mncúèkïì aè mncúèkïì, a kaarïì a ce nyoèrni, a ce nyáèñshi beèe mo' neè mkuèu. Jisoès aè ká' entombïì a laa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' neè yes beèe Farïìsi ce yu ñgaâa mbo'ni naè.	"Meanwhile, when a multitude of many thousands had gathered together, so much so that they trampled on each other, he began to tell his disciples first of all, ""Beware of the yeast of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy."
See ke loèr rlee yoñshi Nyúè ce e yu yïìseèe Tata aègho, ker lor ro' bfúr viseèe ce Nyúè aè m boo a feeseè ye aègho.	With it we bless our God and Father, and with it we curse men, who are made in the image of God.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “Wáâ too máè ená ñwáâ mboèñmboñ njoká? Ñwáè moè' yu ñwáâ mboèñmboñ ka', ñwáâ mboèñmboñ ku ba Nyúè caè'caè'.	"Jesus said to him, ""Why do you call me good? No one is good except one--God."
Weèe aè ba rïìñ weená yi yu boèñboñ ená ñwáè moè'sir kwe aètu beèe neè ce ená to' sïìp yi bú.”	"nor do you consider that it is advantageous for us that one man should die for the people, and that the whole nation not perish."""
Yi yu mini wa'a ená ká' ese aè nfeè' anaè vú ba' seè'ni na, woweèe a ke beè' mncir Musïìs, yuu mo' yi ce cete wap bfee, woweèe a ke' riñ yuu ce a ce beè' ka'.	But to this day, when Moses is read, a veil lies on their heart.
E m yá aèmboè rbuu li múè'ti, yuu mo' yi ce suèu embo aèmboè ma cáâ' báèbár wa'a, a ghashïì aè bcuèu kyeèe efa gho a suusi njep nsheè.	He saw heaven opened and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet let down by four corners on the earth,
E yu Nyúè bgúâú beèe ka', e yu ba Nyúè beèe ce a cu bteèe. Weèe ce faèa seê.”	"He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. You are therefore badly mistaken."""
Seèe rïìñ ená seèe yu boo Nyúè, a riñ ená ñgoèñ wááwá yi yu mbaè mmbo Sataèn.	We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the power of the evil one.
Wèr kòŋ woowèe kaʼ koomucàr.	We donʼt love them at all.
A mbuèu ce máè tuu Timotïì ená e vú yá weèe tá e bo keèr suñ weèe aèmboè ñgeâe boèñboñ ce m ce geèe njobeè' m ce duè aèmbuèu Jisos Kraêis. Timotïì yu muu waè ce máè koèñ, njobeè' weèr ye yu ñwáè moè'sir njep Tata Jisos Kraêis. E ke faè' neè yi ntee-ñwáè. Buu ce e be suñ weèe yu buu ce m ce yá'ni aè bcor ce vi yu aè bdïì' wááwá.	Because of this I have sent Timothy to you, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways which are in Christ, even as I teach everywhere in every assembly.
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè fa seèe ba yú' ce yi geèe seèe ce wáp buu ka', e fa seèe ba yú' ce yi geèe seèe túr ñger ba ntee rkoèñnïì ker ba ntee ce aètaè yi gee seèe túr ñger mbenduè yïìseèe nyor.	For God didn't give us a spirit of fear, but of power, love, and self-control.
a yá yïì ce a m kur yi tu aègho naè. Yi m noèñ aègee vïì anaè ka'. Yi m kashi nyor a noñ jáá.	and the cloth that had been on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but rolled up in a place by itself.
AÈde' seèe laa seená yi yu aèmboè ñgúè mostaè ce e ñwáási seê.	It's like a grain of mustard seed, which, when it is sown in the earth, though it is less than all the seeds that are on the earth,
Woweèe a du aègho a fa neè Jisoès, a co'ni bcáè' a laashi mbenduè mo, a ko'si Jisoès mbo.	They brought it to Jesus. They threw their cloaks on the colt, and set Jesus on them.
Bfúr vi a m ce laèa wa'a, a byemi neè ye ka' foñ.	For even his brothers didn't believe in him.
A mbuèu ce ntee yi m bep máè neè beèe anaè, máè laa máná woweèe a kani efa ryu'ni neè máè, a ker riñ ya nduunjïì ka'.	Therefore I was displeased with that generation, and said, 'They always err in their heart, but they didn't know my ways;'
Baènabaès ba Pol a ka' yu' yuu ce beèe ca a m ce roèo aè rgeèe neè woweèe, a shashi wap bcáè', a cañ a niñ mbe waâp mú, a laa mbekïì enáê,	But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard of it, they tore their clothes, and sprang into the multitude, crying out,
Rboâñtu li yu neè ñwáè ce e ce tarni máè tarni ka'.”	"Blessed is he who finds no occasion for stumbling in me."""
Njeñwáè anaè aè m ba ñwáè enje jáá. A m bi ye aè ñgoâñ Sïìroèfoènisïìyaè. E m bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e fúr yú' nyúèrkaè' ca enjep muu yïì.	Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. She begged him that he would cast the demon out of her daughter.
Ka' yi yu rara ená beèe mo' a be baè' aè dïû' rlúèshïì anaè wa'a, yi ku ba rara foñ ená beèe ce a m yu' blaâa Nyúè a byemi ka' naè, a m baè' aè dïû' rlúèshïì anaè ka'.	Seeing therefore it remains that some should enter therein, and they to whom the good news was before preached failed to enter in because of disobedience,
Kwaè'shi ka neè aèmboè Abraèhaêm. A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Abraèham aè m byemi yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa, li rbyemïì anaè li gee e ba ñwáâ nyáánïì aè bsii Nyúè.”	"Even as Abraham ""believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness."""
A ka' fa weèe ñgá' aè rla' mo', weèe cañ du aè rla' mo' jáá. M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená weèe be jáèr aè mla' Isráèl wááwá ka', tá Muu Ñwáè vúê.	But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the next, for most certainly I tell you, you will not have gone through the cities of Israel, until the Son of Man has come.
Bfúr waê, m ce bu' mmbo neè weèe ená weèe lor ba ya ñgeèe aèmboè má máè aè loèr ñgeèe ye naè. Weèe aè m be gee yuu bebep neè máè ka' koo múcaèr.	I beg you, brothers, become as I am, for I also have become as you are. You did me no wrong,
E m kwe aè btu beèe wááwá, tá beèe ce a cu bteèe a bo cu neè yap tu ka', cu ba aètu ñwáè ce e m kwe a waâp tuè, a fúú efa rkwe.	He died for all, that those who live should no longer live to themselves, but to him who for their sakes died and rose again.
AÈde' yuu mo' yi caa rkoèñnïì ka'. Rkoèñnïì li ke yá faèa ñwáè ka', li ke kwaè'shi boèñboñ aèmboè beèe mo', ker táá tatap aè nfeè' wááwá.	bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
A be koo weèe fa mbe mmbo beèe mo' tá a fa weèe ñgá', yúshi weèe. Beèe wááwá a be baèa weèe njo' máè.	Then they will deliver you up to oppression, and will kill you. You will be hated by all of the nations for my name's sake.
AÈ m ba aè mnoèñ anaè, Jisoès aè ko' mbe rtuèu aè rgeèe rloo, a cu mbo, a loo neè Nyúè caar túè' aè raa.	It happened in these days, that he went out to the mountain to pray, and he continued all night in prayer to God.
Beèe mo' beèe ñkyeèe, a byá' ñwáè ce yïì ñgúè' nyor mo' aè m kwe, a vú aègho.	Four people came, carrying a paralytic to him.
Awá woweèe a gheteèr ená a ba koo ye. A ka' gheèter wa'a, ñwáè aè joo ye ka' njobeè' yïì nfeè' aè m be gháá ka'.	They sought therefore to take him; but no one laid a hand on him, because his hour had not yet come.
A ke too ye enɛ Nfò a?	Is he called Nfor?
Bfúr waê, rmoèoshïì jáá jáèá jáá li ka' vú neè weèe njo' le rbyemïì baná weèe kuè ce lu'shi,	Count it all joy, my brothers, when you fall into various temptations,
Yuu entombïì ce m ce laèa neè wáè yi yu ená weèe loo neè beèe wááwá, yoñshi Nyúè, loo buu ce weèe aè buu ese ye. Loo ená e ja' beèe mo' foñ.	I exhort therefore, first of all, that petitions, prayers, intercessions, and givings of thanks, be made for all men:
Ñwáè moè' aè m vúè a yá Jisoès, a bipshi neè ye enáê. “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, yuu boèñboñ ce aède' m gee ka' koni ryoèñ ce nfeseè yu ba ká?”	"Behold, one came to him and said, ""Good teacher, what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life?"""
njobeè' nfeè' moè' be ba tá beèe a laa enáê, ‘Rboâñtu li yu neè bbyeèñge ce a yu bkar, ce a m be bi boo ka', a ker nyoñsi boo ka'.’	For behold, the days are coming in which they will say, 'Blessed are the barren, the wombs that never bore, and the breasts that never nursed.'
Timotïì ce weèr ye ce faè' aèbee, aè caè'ni weèe. Lushoès ba Jasïìn, ba Soèsipataè ce weèr woweèe yu Jus naè, a caè'ni weèe foñ.	Timothy, my fellow worker, greets you, as do Lucius, Jason, and Sosipater, my relatives.
Waè' yi yááti ená yuu ce Nyúè aè m kaè' neè beèe Isráèl yi buu efa rgeèetïì a? Yi yu wa' ka'. Beèe wááwá embe ndúè' Isráèl a yu beèe Isráèl ka'.	But it is not as though the word of God has come to nothing. For they are not all Israel, that are of Israel.
Weèe ka' tá ce wáp ye ñgaâa bbaèa ka', ca yi be ba ncoâo nrara neè woweèe ená woweèe a be kwe, bú, keèr duèñshi ená Nyúè be geèe tá weèe luêñ.	and in nothing frightened by the adversaries, which is for them a proof of destruction, but to you of salvation, and that from God.
Baná weèe aè ka' ce fa yuu neè beèe ce a buu yuu, weèe fa fyáp msoèñ tá beèe a bo rïìñ yuu ce weèe aè geèe ka'. Ñgaâa mbo'ni a ke geèe wa'a aè mndap mloo ker ba aè btase tá beèe a bo ce yoèñshi woweèe. M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená woweèe a koni wap blaè' wáá.	Therefore when you do merciful deeds, don't sound a trumpet before yourself, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, that they may get glory from men. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward.
Máè yá ncïìndap Nyúè moè' aèmboè e nyáá ekuè mbuèuntii, a túr rkáèá Nyúè ce e yu nteèe. AÈ m ba rkáèá ce a ke fa ncoèo beèe Nyúè aègho. E m fuñ bcïìndap Nyúè ce a m ba beèe ñkyeèe, ce Nyúè aè m fa woweèe ñger ená a bepsi buâu aè nsheè ba buu enjep roè naè.	I saw another angel ascend from the sunrise, having the seal of the living God. He cried with a loud voice to the four angels to whom it was given to harm the earth and the sea,
Ñwáè ce e m yu' buu ca, a ker yá vi neè mmir a máâ Joân. Máè ka' yu' buu ca, yá vi, a gwe njeptii ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m duèñshi máè buu ca tá m bo gú'shi neè ye.	Now I, John, am the one who heard and saw these things. When I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the angel who had shown me these things.
Ñwáè ce e m koo ncúèkïì baa naè aè gee ntaa foñ, a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì baa.	In the same way, he also who got the two gained another two.
Ñgaèa ryá'ni mncir ce a m ba beèe Farïìsi a ka' yá aèmboè e ce ye byee a ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, ba ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', a bipshi neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu enáê, “E ce ye byee a ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep njoká?”	"The scribes and the Pharisees, when they saw that he was eating with the sinners and tax collectors, said to his disciples, ""Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?"""
Mɛ̀ tɛɛ dôŋ.	I have made a head stand.
Blaèa ce m be laèa seè'ni na a blaèa ce m ce laèa neè beèe ce a ce tarni ená m yu ñwáè ntuu neè Tataê.	My defense to those who examine me is this.
M ce sañ neè weâe btaèr njobeè' weèe rïìñ ñwáè ce e m ba efa rkáè'. M ce sañ neè weâe mnsuènsuè njobeè' ce weèe aè so Sataèn.	I write to you, fathers, because you know him who is from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because you have overcome the evil one. I write to you, little children, because you know the Father.
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe ñwaâ' AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Ñwáè moè' ce fuñ aè ntee rïìñ a ce laèa enáê, ‘Kupshi neè nduunjïì neè Tataê, nashi tá yi ba kuèyáá.	"As it is written in the book of the words of Isaiah the prophet, ""The voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make ready the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight."
Woweèe a ka' jïì mdip, ce geèe rloo wáá, a lá map mmbo mbe waâp nduè, a ma'shi woweèe, woweèe a duê.	Then, when they had fasted and prayed and laid their hands on them, they sent them away.
Weèe fa sañ mlii byepkúú ce a yu bleebeèe ka' naè ka', njobeè' woweèe a ka' lo ce kwaè'shi goèr ba aèmboè rboèñ nyor caa rfaè' e neè Jisos Kraêis, woweèe a lo koñ ba aè rduè bguèu.	But refuse younger widows, for when they have grown wanton against Christ, they desire to marry;
Geewa'a, woweèe a ka' byemi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ce Felep aè m feè'shi aèmboè kúú Nyúè ker ba aèmboè rlii Jisos Kraêis, a baptïìr woweèe, mmbañruè ba bbyeèñge.	But when they believed Philip preaching good news concerning the Kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were baptized, both men and women.
Joân aè beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “M ce baèptir beèe ba neè mdip. Ñwáè moè' yu a weâe mú, ce weèe aè be riñ ye ka'.	"John answered them, ""I baptize in water, but among you stands one whom you don't know."
Muu ce nyoŋ mmbee.	The baby is sucking milk.
AÈ be koo rbúè, bi muu mbañruè, fa rlii ená Jisoès.	Behold, you will conceive in your womb, and bring forth a son, and will call his name 'Jesus.'
Jisoès aè ka' fa ncep neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce ncoèp-ba-aè-rúèú mïìsi, a lo embo, a du a ce yá'ni a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè aè mlaâ' aè ñgoèñ anaè.	It happened that when Jesus had finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities.
Mnoèñ vi caa aèmboè waami wa'a, ká' e nyúè ce Jisoès aè m laèa buu ca, e lor Pitaè ba Joân ba Jáêms, a du a woweèe mbe rtuèu aè rgeèe rloo.	It happened about eight days after these sayings, that he took with him Peter, John, and James, and went up onto the mountain to pray.
Mɛ̀ ba kòŋ à rlɛ̀ àmbomma kaʼ.	I wanted to keep it on my own.
Beèe Greâs ca a m duè a yá Felep ce aè rla' Báètsaidaè aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a laa neè ye enáê, “Masaè, weèr ce koèñ aè ryá Jisoès.”	"These, therefore, came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, ""Sir, we want to see Jesus."""
Njɛ̀ɛbwàr [njɛ̀ː-bwàɾ] cn 1a.	one of the clans of Mbum tribe; Wat clan [Anth.
Túè' aè ka' raa, woweèe a yá nje waa ñkúè, a riñ faèdïì' ce woweèe a m ba anaè ka', a ka' ce fyá', a yá dïì' mo' ce rdip li tuñ a bársïî, nsaruñ aè ba aèwaâa roè anaè seê. Woweèe a kwa'shi ená yi ka' ba aètáèr woweèe a doo keñ anaè du aègho mbe dïì' anaè, tá e bo niñ njep múè nsaruñ táá.	When it was day, they didn't recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay with a beach, and they decided to try to drive the ship onto it.
Woweèe a m fa ñger neè ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisos aè mla' anaè, a ce laèa neè woweèe ená woweèe a táá tatap njep rbyemïì. A m laèa enáê, “Seèe be kuè yá ñgá' wáá ka' niñ mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè.”	confirming the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that through many afflictions we must enter into the Kingdom of God.
Woweèe a ka' ce duè ce de' aèmboè buu ca, Jisoès aè vúê, a koni woweèe, a ce duè a woweèe.	It happened, while they talked and questioned together, that Jesus himself came near, and went with them.
A ka' naèti mbekïì, a fúr woweèe njepmbeè a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Masaè weèe, yuu ce aède' m gee ka' luñ yu ká?”	"and brought them out and said, ""Sirs, what must I do to be saved?"""
Ka' beèe mo' efa seèe a yu Juês, beèe mo' a ba beèe enje jáá, beèe mo' a ba bkwaèa, beèe mo' a ba bkwaèa ka' wa'a, seèe wááwá aè m kúti ñwáè moè'sir aè nfeè' ce a m baèptir seèe neè Yú' Nyúè. Ku ba Yú' Nyúè ca ce Nyúè aè m fa neè seèe wááwá ená yi niñ njep viseâe mntee.	For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bond or free; and were all given to drink into one Spirit.
Njeñwáè anaè aè laa enáê, “Yaè taê, rdip rtuñ ca li coomi seê. AÈ túr yuu ce aè be tu' mdip aègho ka', baná aè be tu' mdip ce mi ke mïì ka' efá?	"The woman said to him, ""Sir, you have nothing to draw with, and the well is deep. From where then have you that living water?"
E lo ya mbàa, mɛ̀ nyi ye.	He begged my money and I refused.
Zhi yu nyʉ̀ sɛʼ sèʼni?	What time is it now?
njobeè' m ce yu' aèmboè aè koèñ beèe Nyúè wááwá, a ker byemi neè Tata Jisos Kraêis.	hearing of your love, and of the faith which you have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all the saints;
Zhi yu yɛɛnì.	How is it?
tá yuu ce AÈsayaè ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè aè m laèa yi bo ghááte njo.	that it might be fulfilled which was spoken through Isaiah the prophet, saying,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' no mdip enjep rdip rtuñ ca, ntee mdip yi ku lo luu ye.	"Jesus answered her, ""Everyone who drinks of this water will thirst again,"
Túè' aè ka' sii, Tata Jisoès aè vú a táá aègee Poêl, a laa neè ye enáê, “Táá tatap, fa wáp ka'! Wáè suñ beèe aèmboè máè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, aè be duè suñ beèe aèmboè máè foñ aè rla' Ruêm.”	"The following night, the Lord stood by him, and said, ""Cheer up, Paul, for as you have testified about me at Jerusalem, so you must testify also at Rome."""
njeèndoñ a rúúñgeèr aèmboè yïì búrúè' wa'a. E ka' waa, bsa'mbeèñ ce vi m ba saèamba vi beesïì neè rwañgeèr.	He cried with a loud voice, as a lion roars. When he cried, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
Yaè nyor yu byee ce mini, wa bláá aè ba yuu no ce mini.	For my flesh is food indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
Yàa kʉ̀ à wɛ̀ʼ ɛ.	My rope is loose.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè ka' ce yá ñgá' ba njo' yuu boèñboñ ce weèe aè geèe baná weèe yu ñgaâa mboâñtu. Weèe fa wáp woweèe, maè'shi tá mluè mi ce koo weèe njo' woweèe ka'.	"But even if you should suffer for righteousness' sake, you are blessed. ""Don't fear what they fear, neither be troubled."""
Ca yi m geèe mntee beèe ba mntee bleebeèe ba mntee ñgaâa yá'ni beèe mncir, vi yááñgeèr, woweèe a vú mbenduè Stáfaèn, a koo ye a du aègho mbe kansuèr.	They stirred up the people, the elders, and the scribes, and came against him and seized him, and brought him in to the council,
Máè yá mnyaèabaèraè' anaè a yá aèmboè beèe ce a m ce cañ mbo a m ba. Woweèe a m yar bco' bbáèbár nje ñguèñ. Bco' anaè vi m ce baèñ aèmboè mor wa'a, a ce sii aèmboè ncoèororoè, a ce baèñ aèmboè cwa wa'a. Btuè' mnyaèabaèraè' anaè vi m ba aèmboè btuè' búrúè' wa'a. Mor ba njemor ba rúèú mkaèñ yi m ce fúú ekuè cuèu mnyaèabaèraè' anaè.	Thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those who sat on them, having breastplates of fiery red, hyacinth blue, and sulfur yellow; and the heads of lions. Out of their mouths proceed fire, smoke, and sulfur.
E ke ba àtɛ̀r à ryɛ nyʉ̀ŋkʉ̀ʉ kaʼ.	It is not easy to see a hard beetle.
Woweèe a m naèti a caa njïû aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. Jisoès aè koñ ená ñwáè moè' yi ka',	They went out from there, and passed through Galilee. He didn't want anyone to know it.
‘Rbuu yu ya kaèbaèraè', nshe aè ba ya nta' ntár mkuèu. Tata ce laèa enáê, Njáèá ndap ce aède' weèe ba'rïì neè máè yu ba njáèá ndap ká? Njáèá dïì' ce aède' m lúshïì aèfo, yo njáèá dïì' ká?	heaven is my throne, and the earth a footstool for my feet. What kind of house will you build me?' says the Lord; 'or what is the place of my rest?
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce wáp ba ká wa'a? Le rbyemïì li yu múcaèr seê.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a nati mbekïì, a waa fu' ba rdip, ñgoèñ yi táá nyañ.	"He said to them, ""Why are you fearful, O you of little faith?"" Then he got up, rebuked the wind and the sea, and there was a great calm."
Ŋkǔnyàm zhi ke kòŋ à rtòp ncàʼ sê.	Pigs very much like to roll in mud.
Beèe a m vúè neè bghaèrbeèe foñ ená Jisoès joo woweèe, ghoni woweèe. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ka' yá wa'a, a lapni beèe anaè.	They were also bringing their babies to him, that he might touch them. But when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.
Nfò ce yaŋ e.	Nfor is sick.
Ka' cu, AÈlajaè ba Musïìs a nyáá, a ce de' a Jisoès.	Behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them talking with him.
“Be ba nyúè anaè tá weèe ker loo yuu mo' ese máè ka'. M ce suñ weèe neè mini- ñwáè ená weèe aè ka' loo ka' njáèá ká ese Taèr fa máâ rlii, e be fa yuu anaè neè weèe.	"In that day you will ask me no questions. Most certainly I tell you, whatever you may ask of the Father in my name, he will give it to you.
John	Joân	16	24	Caar gháá seè'ni na, weèe aè be loo yuu mo' fa máâ rlii ka'. Loo neè tá weèe bo koni, tá le rlu'shïì li bo mïìsi.	Until now, you have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and you will receive, that your joy may be made full.
John	Joân	16	25	“Máè suñ weèe buu ca ba aè mñgaèa. Nfeè' ce gháá ce m be keèr suñ weèe buu ba aè mñgaèa ka'. M be suñ weèe rara aèmboè Taèr.	I have spoken these things to you in figures of speech. But the time is coming when I will no more speak to you in figures of speech, but will tell you plainly about the Father.
John	Joân	16	26	Be ba aè nfeè' anaè tá weèe loo buu fa máâ rlii. M ce suñ weèe máná m be keèr loo neè Taèr a weâe btuè ka'.	In that day you will ask in my name; and I don't say to you, that I will pray to the Father for you,
John	Joân	16	27	Taèr ye ye koèñ weèe njobeè' weèe koèñ máè, a byemi ená máè m loè ese Nyúè.	for the Father himself loves you, because you have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God.
John	Joân	16	28	Máè m loè ese Taèr, a vú njep ñgoèñ na. M ce loè seè'ni enjep ñgoèñ na a ce kúti aè ryá Taèr.”	I came out from the Father, and have come into the world. Again, I leave the world, and go to the Father."
Rbyemïì li m geèe Ábáèl aè gee tañshïì neè Nyúè, yi ba boèñboñ aè bsii Nyúè a caa yi Káên. Yi tañshïì yi m boèñ wa'a, Nyúè aè lor ye aèmboè ñwáâ nyáánïì njobeè' e m byemi neè ye. Seèe aè rïìñ wa'a njobeè' Nyúè aè m koo buu ce e m fa neè ye. Ka' e m kwe eluâuñgoèñ wa'a, li rbyemïì li ku bii laèa.	By faith, Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, through which he had testimony given to him that he was righteous, God testifying with respect to his gifts; and through it he, being dead, still speaks.
E m yá'ni beèe a waâp mndap mloo. Beèe wááwá a yu' rboèñ seê, a ku'si ye.	He taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
Beèe caè a lapnïì woweèe, a laa ená woweèe a cu nyañ. Woweèe a ker misi a waa, a laa enáê, “Tataê, Muu Dávïìd, koosimnse neè weèr.”	"The multitude rebuked them, telling them that they should be quiet, but they cried out even more, ""Lord, have mercy on us, you son of David!"""
À be cu àfa nfesè a?	Will you stay here for ever?
Woweèe a m báèáñger seê, a ker jep, a ce bipshi fa waâp mú enáê, “Cena yi yu ba ená ká?”	"They were all amazed, and were perplexed, saying one to another, ""What does this mean?"""
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Sápsi neè mdip anaè du fa neè ñwáè ce e ce gaèpshi buu ñkaè'.” Woweèe a m ku gee aèmboè e m laèa.	"He said to them, ""Now draw some out, and take it to the ruler of the feast."" So they took it."
Ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè a m sañ enáê, ‘Nyúè be keè yá'ni woweèe wááwá.’ Baná ñwáè ce e ka' yu' nlaâa yaè Taê, yá'ni buu ese ye, baná ñgaèñ be vúè yá máè.	It is written in the prophets, 'They will all be taught by God.' Therefore everyone who hears from the Father, and has learned, comes to me.
Fàakɛ a ba du ntaa a Nyaʼ.	Fake and Nyah went to the market.
Weèr ce koèñ werná weèe wááwá ku ce gee rfaè' ca neè ye ntee-ñwáè caar du ba' aèlúèsimbuèu, tá weèe bo koni buu ce weèe cu ce keè' naè.	We desire that each one of you may show the same diligence to the fullness of hope even to the end,
Ñwáè moè' aè túr yuu mo' aè rbeèesi neè ye ka'. Ká' e nyúè anaè, ñwáè moè' aè ker túr cuèu aè rbipshi yuu mo' neè ye ka'.	No one was able to answer him a word, neither did any man dare ask him any more questions from that day forth.
E ke nàanyor sê.	He is usually very proud.
Woweèe a laèa neè ye enáê, “Wer ce koèñ werná e ba aè nfeè' ce aè cu mbe wáâ kaèbaèraè' naè, tá weèr cute aègee wáè, moè' cu a yo bo maè', tá moè' cu aè yo bo ñkoèp.”	"They said to him, ""Grant to us that we may sit, one at your right hand, and one at your left hand, in your glory."""
Yu ba nshe ce e ke geèe kwaa ku', bate. Yuu entoèmbïì e ke ba nceèe, e loè embenjïìmo sop mú saè' ka' bate.	For the earth bears fruit: first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a riñ seè'ni ená e ba ce laèa neè woweèe ba ená woweèe a lor nfeè' neè yis bráâd ka', e ba ce laèa ba ená woweèe a lor nfeè' neè ryá'nïì beèe Farïìsi ba beèe Saduèsïî.	Then they understood that he didn't tell them to beware of the yeast of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
“Weèe aè ka' ce jïì mdip, weèe fa ce koosimnse aèmboè ñgaâa mbo'ni a ke geèe naè ka', njobeè' woweèe a ke jïì mdip wa'a, su'si mmir ka', tá beèe a bo yá ená woweèe a ce jïì mdip. M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená woweèe a koo wap blaè' wáá.	"Moreover when you fast, don't be like the hypocrites, with sad faces. For they disfigure their faces, that they may be seen by men to be fasting. Most certainly I tell you, they have received their reward.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	17	Weèe aè ka' ce jïì mdip, weèe yo' mgúr mbe tuè, yár mmir,	But you, when you fast, anoint your head, and wash your face;
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	18	faè dïì' beèe a bo rïìñ ená weèe ce jïì mdip ka', tá ku rïìñ ba yeè Ta Nyúè ce beèe a ke yá ye ka', tá yeè Ta ca ce e ke yá buu ce beèe a geèe aè bsúèti bo laè' weèe.	so that you are not seen by men to be fasting, but by your Father who is in secret, and your Father, who sees in secret, will reward you.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	6	19	“Weèe fa láè wee bkuè' njep ñgoèñ njep dïì' ce aède' mfyáp vi ye, nlo ye, byáèá vi kep ndap yáá ka'.	Don't lay up treasures for yourselves on the earth, where moth and rust consume, and where thieves break through and steal;"
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' seèe yu byáánïì aè bsii Nyúè njo' liseèe rbyemïì, seèe ce cu neè rfúteè-ñwáè seèe Nyúè weèe njo' yuu ce yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe.	Being therefore justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
Weèe aè ba riñ weená m ce laèa neè weèe ba aèmboè bráâd ka' ka' njoká? Loèr neè nfeè' neè yis beèe Farïìsi ba beèe Saduèsïî.”	"How is it that you don't perceive that I didn't speak to you concerning bread? But beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees."""
E m cu aè rla' Jopaè aè mnoèñ aèñgoo a Saimúèn ñwáè yaati mñguâp nyaèa.	It happened, that he stayed many days in Joppa with one Simon, a tanner.
Muu Njeèe ce e yu aègee kaèbaèraè' be cïìñ woweèe aèmboè gaèy wa'a. E be loèr woweèe duè aègho faè rdip ce li ke fúú aè nfeè' wááwá ce fa ryoèñ ce nfeseè. Nyúè be siñsi mñgoommir ese woweèe wááwá.”	"for the Lamb who is in the midst of the throne shepherds them, and leads them to springs of waters of life. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes."""
Pol aè kanïì, a laa enáê, “Máè geèe faèa moè' kuu mncir Juês, ba Ndap Nyúè ka', a gee faèa moè' neè ñkúú aè to' Rum ka'.”	"while he said in his defense, ""Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I sinned at all."""
E beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Weâe koèñ ená m gee máká neè weèe?”	"He said to them, ""What do you want me to do for you?"""
Mbàʼ yu mbe ndùu shà anà.	There are foams on that corn beer.
E m maè'shi nta' goèr ca, a lor yi tu njep nsheè a ba aèmboè ñkwaèa wa'a. A m bi ye aè ñwáè.	but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men.
Mɛ̀ nyɛ̀ŋ ye ànjii e ku karsi nyor a lip mɛ̀.	I stepped on him by mistake and he just turned and slapped me.
Ñgúè buu ce e m gweèñger aè múè msini naè, táá aètu beèe ce a yu' blaâa Nyúè, ku byemi, mluè ce aè buu enjep ñgoèñ na, ba broñ buu, vi kur blaèa anaè, yi gee ñgúè ka'.	What was sown among the thorns, this is he who hears the word, but the cares of this age and the deceitfulness of riches choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Máè mú ce koèñ se ená seèe ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap ca, tá m ka' yá ñgá'.	"He said to them, ""I have earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you before I suffer,"
Yi ku ba aèmboè AÈsayaè aè m laèa foñ enáê, “Tata Nyúè ce e túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá aè m ka' tá baè maè'shi boo moè' neè seèe ka', seèe aè m ba ba aèmboè rla' Sodoèm ba rla' Goèmoraè.” wa'a.	"As Isaiah has said before, ""Unless the Lord of Armies had left us a seed, we would have become like Sodom, and would have been made like Gomorrah."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' so, baná ñgaèñ be koni buu ca wááwá. M be ba yïì Nyúè, tá e ba muu waè.	He who overcomes, I will give him these things. I will be his God, and he will be my son.
Beèe a ce vúè magoèr, ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès a ke' túr njïì aè rye yuu ka'. Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Seèe du aè dïì' mo' ce beèe a yu ka' tá weèe lúshi múcaèr.”	"He said to them, ""You come apart into a deserted place, and rest awhile."" For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat."
Jisoès aè yá taa ce woweèe a ce leè', a bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce moèoshi máè njoká? Naèa neè mbúè mbaèa ce a ke maè' mbaèa aègho.”	"Shall we give, or shall we not give?"" But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, ""Why do you test me? Bring me a denarius, that I may see it."""
À kaʼ zhɛɛ a koo wɛ̀ banɛ a yòo nsaʼ.	If you still and you are caught, it is your fault.
A sañ mbe dïì' mo' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè aèmboè noèñ ce Nyúè aè m mïìsi li rfaè', enáê, “Nyúè aè m geèe li rfaè' aè mnoèñ ntuunfu a misïî, túè' aè ka' raa ce ená a mnoèñ saèambaê, e lúshïì.”	"For he has said this somewhere about the seventh day, ""God rested on the seventh day from all his works;"""
Mròʼni mi m kɛ̀ njo bzhɛ̀ɛ.	Curses began because of stealing.
Woweèe a ka' yu' blaèa ca, beèe mo' efa waâp mú a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè anaè ghup.”	"Many of the multitude therefore, when they heard these words, said, ""This is truly the prophet."""
Káâ' aè nfeè' ce máè m ba aè rla' Táèsaèlonikaè weèe aè m tuusi buu a ja' máè aègho bkaèñ aèñgoo.	For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again to my need.
Muu anaè aè ka' ce vúè, nyúèrkaè' anaè aè ma' ye aè nsheè, e búúñgeèr. Jisoès aè lapnïì yú' bebep anaè a gee muu anaè aè luêñ, e kúsïì ye neè yïì taê.	While he was still coming, the demon threw him down and convulsed him violently. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
They carried ityap cùu 220 yee 220 2-Limbum-English Dictionary-jb.	doc themselves.
Nyor aè m bep ñwáè ce e m ba ñwáâ ñgoèr embe ndaèp rloo njobeè' Jisoès aè m geèe njeñwáè anaè aè ke'seè nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè, e laa neè beèe enáê, “Mnoèñ nfaè' buu vi yu ntuunfu. Baná weèe aè ba vúè aè mnoèñ anaè tá a gee tá weèe ke'se, ke' ba ená weèe vú ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè ka'.”	"The ruler of the synagogue, being indignant because Jesus had healed on the Sabbath, said to the multitude, ""There are six days in which men ought to work. Therefore come on those days and be healed, and not on the Sabbath day!"""
E lìp ye a kep nfàŋ.	He has beaten him and has broken the rib.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' weèe ce sár mnsár ba aèmboè blaèa ba mlii ker ba ye ncïìr, baná weèe aè ba sa' wee mnsa' mïìsi fa weâe mú. M be sa' njáèá mnsa' anaè ka'.”	"but if they are questions about words and names and your own law, look to it yourselves. For I don't want to be a judge of these matters."""
Beèe ca a ka' cu teèteè seê, ye yuu ka', Pol aè natïì a táá a waâp mú a laa enáê, “Beèe caê, weèe aè mú yu' yuu ce máè mú laa neè weèe aè to' Kreât naè, cu aèfo, yïìseèe buu aè ba keèr bep, bú aè cicïì ka'.	"When they had been long without food, Paul stood up in the middle of them, and said, ""Sirs, you should have listened to me, and not have set sail from Crete, and have gotten this injury and loss."
Keñ aè ce dii aèwaâa roè, weèr aè yá ñgá' seê, a ka' ba' aè dïì' ce a m ce too ená Fáá Háváèn aègee rla' Lisïìyaè.	With difficulty sailing along it we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near the city of Lasea.
Yuu mo' yi yáátïì aèmboè mcuèñ mor wa'a, a da' a suu mbenduè ñwáè wááwá.	Tongues like fire appeared and were distributed to them, and one sat on each of them.
Weèr ce koosi bsáè ka', a koñ yer aè rmaè'shi nyor ca duè cu aè laè' weèr Tata weèe.	We are courageous, I say, and are willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be at home with the Lord.
Mboè weèr túr ñger aè rloèr wer bbyeèñge ce a yu ñgaâa rbyemïì, tá weèr woweèe ce kar aèmboè Pitaè ba ñgaâa ntuu mo' foñ, ker ba bfúr Tata Jisoès a ce geèe naè a?	Have we no right to take along a wife who is a believer, even as the rest of the apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Weèe ce laèa ye weená, ñwáè aè ka' lor yuu ce yi ba jaè' yïì ma káè yïì ta aègho, laa enáê, ‘Máè fa neè Nyúè’,	"But you say, 'Whoever may tell his father or his mother, ""Whatever help you might otherwise have gotten from me is a gift devoted to God,"""
E m fa rsa' neè weèr ená weèr fe'shi neè beèe, suñ beèe ená yu ye ce Nyúè aè m ce ená e ba ñwáè ce e be keè sa' beèe ce a cu bteèe ker ba beèe ce a m kweñger.	He commanded us to preach to the people and to testify that this is he who is appointed by God as the Judge of the living and the dead.
E lìp ye à gèʼ.	He has slapped her on the jaw.
a woweèe a natïì a du aè rla' jáá.	"For the Son of Man didn't come to destroy men's lives, but to save them."" They went to another village."
E m loè a du mbe ndaèp Taitïìyuès ce e m ba aègee ndap rloo. E m ba ñwáè ce e m ce loo neè Nyúè.	He departed there, and went into the house of a certain man named Justus, one who worshiped God, whose house was next door to the synagogue.
A zhìi na.	Nfor and I bought two cutlasses.
Mkòŋ mmisò mi cɛp kaʼ.	Our own spears are not sharp.
Rïìñ ená mkwaè'shïì njáèá ñwáè ca mi jep, e ce geèe buu bbebep, a lor ndoèo mbe yeâ tuè.	knowing that such a one is perverted, and sins, being self-condemned.
Rïìñ neè ená Nyúè e ke fa njáèá ñgá' ca ba neè ñwáè ce e koèñ. E ke lïìp ba ñwáè ce e loèr ená a muu yïì.”	"For whom the Lord loves, he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ñgaâa mfaè' enáê, “Tu' neè mdip cu'ni njep mntúñ ca.” Woweèe a m tu' mdip a cu'ni njep mntúñ anaè mi ruu aègho wááwá.	"Jesus said to them, ""Fill the water pots with water."" They filled them up to the brim."
Dávïìd aè ka' too ye ená Tataê, baná aède' e ker ba muu yïì aè njáâá ká?”	If then David calls him Lord, how is he his son?
Rbyemïì li m geèe e ká' Ñkaâ' caèasi mndap. E m laèa neè beèe Isráèl ená a ñwañshi bláá aè ncúèúndúè' tá ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m ce yúshi boo mmbañruè ce a m ba boo rñgoèo naè, e caèa bo yá, yúshi boo rñgoèo ce beèe Isráèl a m túr ka'.	By faith, he kept the Passover, and the sprinkling of the blood, that the destroyer of the firstborn should not touch them.
Ku' beèe magoèr se a laashïì bcáè' njep nduunjïì, beèe mo' a gwar mnta' ce, a laashi njo.	A very great multitude spread their clothes on the road. Others cut branches from the trees, and spread them on the road.
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ba ñgaâa kansuèr, a roo beèe tá a bo vúè táá njïìnsa' mnaèñ, tá a koo ye yú. Geewa'a, a yá faèa ka'.	Now the chief priests, the elders, and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, that they might put him to death;
Bǎ ca tʉr boo ncòp tâ ba mtuŋnyɛɛ còp baa.	This father has fifty children and twenty grandsons and daughters.
Bfúr waê, weèr ce loo neè weèe ená weèe yu'ni neè beèe ce a ce faè' a weâe mú, aè ba beèe ce Tata Nyúè aè ce ená woweèe a ke'ni ker ce yá'ni weèe naè.	But we beg you, brothers, to know those who labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you,
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Ndur yoè be fúú efa rkwe.”	"Jesus said to her, ""Your brother will rise again."""
Weèe aè túr mmir, a ke' ce yá buu ka' a? A túr btuè', a ke' ce yu' buu ka' a? Káè yu ba ená weèe ce kuushi buu ka' a?	Having eyes, don't you see? Having ears, don't you hear? Don't you remember?
Baná yi yu yáánïì aè ryu'ni neè ñgaâa rsa', ke' ku ba ba njobeè' aè ce wáp ñgá' ka'. Geèe wa'a faè dïì' yo ntee yi bo ce sa' wáè ka'.	Therefore you need to be in subjection, not only because of the wrath, but also for conscience' sake.
Nyor Jisos Kraâis yu moè'sir. Yú' Nyúè yi ba e mo'sir. Yuu ce Nyúè aè m ká' seèe, seèe aè lá mmir mbenduè mo yi ku ba e mo'sir foñ.	There is one body, and one Spirit, even as you also were called in one hope of your calling;
M ̀ be màʼshi enɛ mgbaŋ mi niŋ mɛ̀ kaʼ.	I will not allow myself to be attacked by jiggers.
Gʉ̀ʉshi bèʼtè anà.	Fill that pit with soil.
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “M ka' ce kuè'si ya tu, bkuè' anaè ba yuu cicïì. Ñwáè ce e ce kuè'si máè yu yaè Ta ce weèe ce laèa ená a yeè Nyúè naè.	"Jesus answered, ""If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. It is my Father who glorifies me, of whom you say that he is our God."
Koèñ neè beèe neè mini-ñwáè, baa yuu bebep, koñ ba yuu boèñboñ.	Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that which is evil. Cling to that which is good.
Tetèr à bèeti à ŋkaŋka.	A caterpillar has transformed into a butterfly.
Yi ke fa beèe mo' bfee aè rláè ntee aè buu Nyúè, ker fa beèe mo' bfee aè rgeèe ñgaâa byañ a ke'se. Ku ba Yú' yi mo'sir ce yi geèe buu ca wááwá.	to another faith, by the same Spirit; and to another gifts of healings, by the same Spirit;
Jisoès aè koosimnse neè woweèe, a joo map mmir, woweèe a ku ká' a ce yá buu, a nati a du a yeâ mbuèu.	Jesus, being moved with compassion, touched their eyes; and immediately their eyes received their sight, and they followed him.
Seèe kwa'shi aèmboè aède' seèe yáásïì mntee bfúr mo' tá seèe bo koèñ beèe keèr geèe buu bboèñboñ.	Let us consider how to provoke one another to love and good works,
Manshe ce cu ba serna.	Manshi lives but that way.
Ndoèo aè co' weèe njobeè' weèe ce boo msheè neè ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ce aè m yúshi ba weêe btaê, a yúshi woweèe.	Woe to you! For you build the tombs of the prophets, and your fathers killed them.
E ma'shïì woweèe a fúú efa rla' Jáèrusaláèm a du aè rla' Bátanïì, a noñ aèfo.	He left them, and went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.
E m maè' ñgaèa neè beèe enáê, “Ñwáè moè' aè m faè' yi nsuu, a bye njáèá msini ce a ke geèe mruè' aègho mbo, a lá neè beèe mo' ená a di' ce fa' nsuu anaè ce fa ye mú yuu. E ka' láè neè woweèe, a du aè mbeè, a du a cu taètaè seê.	"He began to tell the people this parable. ""A man planted a vineyard, and rented it out to some farmers, and went into another country for a long time."
e niñ mbe keñ a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu weèe, a tuu aè mbeèp Daèlmaènutaè.	Immediately he entered into the boat with his disciples, and came into the region of Dalmanutha.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa enáê, “Tataê, e ka' ce buumi baná e be luèñ.”	"The disciples therefore said, ""Lord, if he has fallen asleep, he will recover."""
“M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè aè ka' ce niñ mbe ñka' njeèe, ko' aè ñka', ke' du njïì embe cuâu ñka' ka', baná ñgaèñ yu nyáèá a ker ba ñkep.	"Most certainly, I tell you, one who doesn't enter by the door into the sheep fold, but climbs up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber.
John	Joân	10	2	Ñwáè ce e ka' niñ aè cuâu ñka' baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè ncïìñ njeèe anaè.	But one who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
John	Joân	10	3	Ñwáè ce e ce ke'ni cuâu ñka' be múè' cuâu ñka' neè ye, tá e ká' yi njeèe aè mlii, tá yi njeèe yi yu' yïì njeèndoñ, tá e keñsi yi njeèe anaè fúú aègho embe ñka'.	The gatekeeper opens the gate for him, and the sheep listen to his voice. He calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.
John	Joân	10	4	E ka' fúr yi njeèe embe ñka' wááwá, táá entombïì ce duè, yi njeèe yi ce vúè embe yeâ njïì njobeè' yi rïìñ yïì njeèndoñ.	Whenever he brings out his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him, for they know his voice.
John	Joân	10	5	AÈde' yi byemïì aè rduè aèmbuèu ñwáâ jáá ka'. Yi ka' yá ñwáâ jáá yi ká' ce cañ cañ, njobeè' yi rïìñ njeèndoñ ñwáè anaè ka'.”	They will by no means follow a stranger, but will flee from him; for they don't know the voice of strangers."
A mbuèu ce weèr ce faè', a ce faate msoèñ. Weèr ce geèe wa'a njobeè' weèr aè láè mer mmir ba mbenduè Nyúè ce e yu nteèe. E yu Nyúè ce e be geèe tá beèe wááwá a bo luèñ, lañlañ beèe ce a byemi neè ye.	For to this end we both labor and suffer reproach, because we have set our trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe.
Tikikoès be suñ weèe buu wááwá ce vi koni máè. E yu nfúr ce weèr koèñ ye seê. E ce geèe rfaè' Tata Nyúè neè yi ntee wááwá. Weèr ye ce faè' neè Tata Jisoès aèbee.	All my affairs will be made known to you by Tychicus, the beloved brother, faithful servant, and fellow bondservant in the Lord.
M ce kwaè'shi máná weèe aè m yu' wáá ená Nyúè aè m ce máè ená m suñ weèe aèmboè ntee boèñboñ ce e túr neè weèe.	if it is so that you have heard of the administration of that grace of God which was given me toward you;
Jisoès aè ka' ce laèa wa'a woweèe a riñ ená e ce laèa ba aèmboè yïì Ta ka'.	They didn't understand that he spoke to them about the Father.
Beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú ca aè m ba Saimúèn ce e m too ená Pitaè,	Simon, to whom he gave the name Peter;
À be byɛ̀ʼ ŋguu gòr, tɛ zhi ghaʼ wɛ̀.	If you carry too much wood like that, then it will be heavy.
Yi yá wa'a, ker du vú neè byú' mmo' vi saèambaê, ce vi bep a caa yi, a woweèe a niñ cu mbo, ñgaèñ misi bep caa aèmboè e m ba entombïì. A mboè yi be keèe ba neè ñgúè beâe bbebep e seè'ni wa'a.”	"Then he goes, and takes with himself seven other spirits more evil than he is, and they enter in and dwell there. The last state of that man becomes worse than the first. Even so will it be also to this evil generation."""
Bkar waê, m ce laèa neè weèe máná weèe fa wáp beèe ce a ke yú ñwáè e kwe wáá, a ker túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe ka' naè ka'.	"I tell you, my friends, don't be afraid of those who kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do.
Luke	Luêk	12	5	M be suñ weèe ñwáè ce aède' weèe wáp. Wáp neè ñwáè ce e ka' yú ñwáè wáá, e ker túr ñger aè rmaè' ye njep mor foñ naè. ÁÈno, m ce suñ weèe ená weèe wáp ba ye.	But I will warn you whom you should fear. Fear him, who after he has killed, has power to cast into Gehenna. Yes, I tell you, fear him.
Luke	Luêk	12	6	Mboè a ke fyeèni bbe' ta aè bfraâñ mmbaa a? Ka' yi yu wa'a, Nyúè aè leèse moè' efa múè bbe' anaè ka'.	Aren't five sparrows sold for two assaria coins? Not one of them is forgotten by God."
Yàa ta à cir kòp ŋkaa.	My father has banned a raffia bush.
Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès moè' anaè aè cañ a caa Pitaè, a du a ba' faèdïì' ce rsheè li m ba naè entombïì.	They both ran together. The other disciple outran Peter, and came to the tomb first.
Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès ca a ñwáè ce e ce suñ weèe buu ca. AÈ m sañ ye a sañ buu ca. Weèr rïìñ werná yuu ce e laèa yi yu mini.	This is the disciple who testifies about these things, and wrote these things. We know that his witness is true.
Wɛ̌ gèe à ceeshì brɛrɛŋ ca sò bo sɛɛ mtaʼ àgho.	You should cut these bamboos into pieces so that we can make chairs with.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè yu' aèmboè njeèndoñ aè laèa tatap embe dïì' Nyúè. E m laèa neè bcïìndap Nyúè saèamba caè enáê, “Cuè' neè rshentee Nyúè ce weèe túr aè bghee naè njep ñgoèñ.”	"I heard a loud voice out of the temple, saying to the seven angels, ""Go and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God on the earth!"""
Ñwáè ce e ka' yá máè, baná ñgaèñ aè yá ñwáè ce e m tuu máè.	He who sees me sees him who sent me.
Woweèe a beesïì enáê, “Tataê, weèr ce koèñ ená aè gee tá weèr yá buu.”	"They told him, ""Lord, that our eyes may be opened."""
Woweèe a ka' yu' ca, a ghaa mbekïì, a cete wap btuè', a cañ a gúmi mbe yeâ nduè.	But they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and rushed at him with one accord.
Tata ce e ke fa seèe cumúnyañ, fa weèe cumúnyañ ca aè nfeè' wááwá, ka' aè ba koni ká koni weèe áè. Tata ba a ñwáè wááwá efa weâe mú.	Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace at all times in all ways. The Lord be with you all.
À kaʼ koo ŋgwa ŋwɛ̀ banɛ wɛ̀ gèe mnyɛ̌r.	If you make love with somebodyʼs wife therefore you have done a bad thing.
Máè yá aèmboè nyaèabaèraâ' mbeer aè vúè. A m fa ñwáè ce e m cu mbe nyaèabaèraè' anaè ñger ená e gee tá cumúnyañ mi enjep ñgoèñ na tá beèe a bo ce yúshi wap mnyor. A m fa ye ma kaèafaè'.	Another came forth, a red horse. To him who sat on it was given power to take peace from the earth, and that they should kill one another. There was given to him a great sword.
Woweèe a m moèo laèr njoká? AÈ m ba njobeè' woweèe a m gheèter aè rba byáánïì njo' mfaè', ke' ba ba njo' rbyemïì ka'. Woweèe a m kote aè luèr,	Why? Because they didn't seek it by faith, but as it were by works of the law. They stumbled over the stumbling stone;
njobeè' m be fa weèe blaèa kuè cuèu, ba bfee aè njáèá ce aède' moè' efa beèe ce a baèa weèe riñ yuu ce e beesi ka'.	for I will give you a mouth and wisdom which all your adversaries will not be able to withstand or to contradict.
Weèr aè ka' baè' nje waa ñkúè, luèñ efa ñgá', a yu' ená rlii rla' ce rdip li m sïìr a tarte anaè li yu ená Málitaè.	When we had escaped, then they learned that the island was called Malta.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a yu ñgaâa bwáp, ba beèe ce a yu mini ka', ba ñgaâa bsaèrbuu, ba ñgaâa nyúshi beèe, a be fa woweèe ñgá'. Beèe ce a ce saèki, ba ñgaâa tú', ba beèe ce a ce gú'shi neè mnyúè enjep ñgoèñ na, ba ñgaâa mnde', a be fa woweèe ñgá' foñ. A be koo woweèe wááwá maè' njep ma mor ce mkaèñ mi ce she njo. Ñgá' ca yu rkwe embenjïì.”	"But for the cowardly, unbelieving, sinners, abominable, murderers, sexually immoral, sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars, their part is in the lake that burns with fire and sulfur, which is the second death."""
Yuu ce e m laèa anaè yi yu mini. Baná aè lapni woweèe tatap seê, tá woweèe a bo byemi ba yuu ce yi yu mini.	This testimony is true. For this cause, reprove them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith,
Jisoès aè ker ma' ñgaèa moè' neè woweèe enáê, “Kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ñgúè mostaè ce ñwáè aè m loèr a bye fa yeâ ñkúè.	"He set another parable before them, saying, ""The Kingdom of Heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field;"
Fa maè'shi tá buu mo' ce beèe mo' a ce yá'ni, vi ba yi jáá naè, vi lo bo' weèe ka'. Yuu ce yi geèe viseèe mntee vi ka' tap, aè geèe ba bghoènïì ce vi vúè ese Nyúè. Mncir ce vi yu a kuu ba byee naè vi yu aè cicïì. AÈde' mncir anaè vi ja' beèe ce a ce láè vi ka'.	Don't be carried away by various and strange teachings, for it is good that the heart be established by grace, not by food, through which those who were so occupied were not benefited.
Jisoès aè m ker laa neè beèe enáê, “A máè rraa enjep ñgoèñ na. Ñwáè ce e ka' vú fa máâ mbuèu baná aède' e ker jár aè túè'nji ka', e be koni ba rraa ce li fa ryoèñ.”	"Again, therefore, Jesus spoke to them, saying, ""I am the light of the world. He who follows me will not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	"If any man has ears to hear, let him hear."""
Wɛ̀ ròo a koni.	You have searched and found.
Beèe anaè aè m ba Saimúèn ce e m too ená Pitaè, ba Andruè ce e m ba nfúr Saimúèn, ba Jáêms, ba Joân, ba Feleêp, ba Baètoèlomïì,	Simon, whom he also named Peter; Andrew, his brother; James; John; Philip; Bartholomew;
M ̀ be kʉti mbenjì mnǒŋ btaar.	I will come after three days.
Ŋwɛ̀ ca e ke dɛte sê.	This man is not always time conscious.
E ka' ce kwaè'shi wa'a, Nyúè aè laa neè ye enáê, ‘Lúr caê, m be koo lo ryoèñ neètú' e ntïìni na, tá ku' yoè buu ce wáè kupshi a lá na ba vïû nda?’	"But God said to him, 'You foolish one, tonight your soul is required of you. The things which you have prepared--whose will they be?'
Luke	Luêk	12	21	A mboè yi be kuè ba wa'a neè ñwáè ce e loèr yïì buu wááwá a lá ba neè yïì nyor, a ke' túr buu aè mbeèp yïì Nyúè ka'.”	So is he who lays up treasure for himself, and is not rich toward God."
AÈ ka' ba njo' buu ce Nyúè aè geèe neè weèe na, m ce loo neè weèe káâ' aè nfeè' ce beèe a m suñ máè ená weèe aè byemi neè Tata Jisoès, a ker koñ beèe Nyúè wááwá.	For this cause I also, having heard of the faith in the Lord Jesus which is among you, and the love which you have toward all the saints,
Wèr ròo enɛ sèe deʼ.	We wish that we should discuss.
Beèe mo' efa múè kúr beèe ca a m laèa yuu jáá, beèe mo' a laa yuu jáá. Bjep vi ba goèr seê, yi ba aètáèr neè ye aè rrïìñ yuu ce yi koni ka', e laa ená a lor Pol du aègho mbe barakïì.	Some shouted one thing, and some another, among the crowd. When he couldn't find out the truth because of the noise, he commanded him to be brought into the barracks.
Woowèe a m kàʼ enɛ a be dù nyʉ̀ sondɛ̀.	They planned that they would go on Sunday.
Ñgaâa yá'nïì buu Joân mo' a m káè' a ce sár mnsár a ñwáè moè' efa múè Jus aèmboè aède' ñwáè su'sïì nyor ba nrara aè bsii Nyúè.	There arose therefore a questioning on the part of John's disciples with some Jews about purification.
Fa yu'shi yuu ce beèe mo' a ce laèa ená weèe lor wee mnyor njep nsheè, a ker ce laèa ená weèe gú'shi neè bcïìndap Nyúè naè ka'. Woweèe a ce laèa wa'a, a ce bepsi weèe bepsi. Njáèá beèe anaè a ce laèa ená Nyúè aè geèe woweèe a yá rlo. Woweèe a laèa wa'a, a ce naèa ba tu aè cicïì, bfee wap aè ba bfee enjep ñgoèñ na.	Let no one rob you of your prize by a voluntary humility and worshipping of the angels, dwelling in the things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind,
E m yá'ni beèe a laa enáê, “Mboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená, ‘A be too yaè ndap ená ndap rloo neè bto' wááwá’ a? Ka' yi yu wa'a, weèe aè gee yaè ndap aè kútïì ba mbúè' byáèá.”	"He taught, saying to them, ""Isn't it written, 'My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations?' But you have made it a den of robbers!"""
Zhi yu njìsàp ce sò à be tarte kaʼ.	It is a long time that we have not met.
Beèe ce a ce cu njep ñgoèñ a be gú'shi neè nyaèa ca. Beèe ce a be gú'shi ka' be ba beèe ce a m sañ map mlii mbe ñwaè' Muu Njeèe ce a m yú. A m sañ mlii ca tá ñgoèñ yi ka' keè ba aègho.	All who dwell on the earth will worship him, everyone whose name has not been written from the foundation of the world in the book of life of the Lamb who has been killed.
E cu wa'a a ce keè' ba nfeè' ce Nyúè be láè yi ñgaâa bbaèa njep yeâ tïìi tá e tár mi mkuèu mbe waâp nduè.	from that time waiting until his enemies are made the footstool of his feet.
E m ker laa foñ neè ñwáè ce e ba be ye naè enáê, “Wáè ka' fár byee vïû neèmootïì, káè vïû aè mbuèuñkuèr áè, aè fa be ba bkar wo káè bfúr wo, káè beèe ce weèe woweèe aè raète, káè ñgaâa mbaèa ce weèe woweèe ce cu aè dïû' mo'sir ka'. Wáè ka' be ba woweèe baná aède' woweèe foñ a ku be wáè, tá yi ba seè'ni ená woweèe a laè' yoè ntar ce wáè m tar woweèe aègho naè.	"He also said to the one who had invited him, ""When you make a dinner or a supper, don't call your friends, nor your brothers, nor your kinsmen, nor rich neighbors, or perhaps they might also return the favor, and pay you back."
Yi yu wa' ka'. AÈmboè seèe rïìñ ená Nyúè yu ñwáè mini, baná aède' weèr byemïì aè rgeèe yuu ker lo kani efa rgeèe yi ka'.	"But as God is faithful, our word toward you was not ""Yes and no."""
Woweèe a ka' baè' a yá aèmboè a biñsi luèr embe nduè ncuâu rsheè.	They found the stone rolled away from the tomb.
Kòo nè yee mbàa lɛ àmbommee.	Take your money and keep on your own.
Yaè Ta ce e fa yi neè máè, túr ñger a caa buu wááwá. AÈde' ñwáè moè' fúr njeèe ca embaè mmbo yaè Ta ka'.	My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all. No one is able to snatch them out of my Father's hand.
Weèe fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' bo' weèe neè blaâa bcicïì tá weèe gee njáèá buu ca ka'. Yu njo' buu anaè ce ená Nyúè be ko'si rshentee, fa ñgá' neè beèe ce a ce yu'ni neè ye ka'.	Let no one deceive you with empty words. For because of these things, the wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
Saimún Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “Tataê, aède' weèr ka' ker du yá ba nda? A wáè ce aè túr blaèa ce vi ke geèe beèe a koni ryoèñ ce li be keè mïì ka'.	"Simon Peter answered him, ""Lord, to whom would we go? You have the words of eternal life."
Rraa ca li geèe beèe a gee buu wááwá ce vi yu bboèñboñ, a ba yáánïì, a ker ba mini.	for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth,
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' elúèsimbuèu, e duñshïì yïì nyor neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ce a m báti ncoèp-moè'sir-aè-rrúèú, aè nfeè' ce woweèe a m ce ye byee. E m lapni woweèe njobeè' woweèe a m teèe-btu, a byemi ka'. E m lapni woweèe wa'a njobeè' beèe ce a m yá ye a m suñ woweèe ená e fúú efa rkwe, woweèe a kanïì.	Afterward he was revealed to the eleven themselves as they sat at the table, and he rebuked them for their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they didn't believe those who had seen him after he had risen.
“Yeèr beèe, weèe ce geèe wa' njoká? Weèr yu beèe aèmboè weèe. Weèr aè vúè aè rfeè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè weèe tá weèe bo maè'shi buu bcicïì ca, byemi ba neè Nyúè ce e yu nteèe, aè ba Nyúè ce e m boo rbuu ba nshe ba mdip ker ba buu wááwá.	"Men, why are you doing these things? We also are men of like passions with you, and bring you good news, that you should turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the sky and the earth and the sea, and all that is in them;
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	14	16	AÈ m ba mbe nfeè' entoèmbïì, e ma'shïì bto' wááwá vi ce geèe aèmboè vi gwáá.	who in the generations gone by allowed all the nations to walk in their own ways.
Acts	Mfaè' Ñgaâa Ntuu Jisoès	14	17	Ka' yi m ba wa', Nyúè aè m be borni efa rduèñshi weèe njáèá ñwáè ce e yu aè nfeè' wááwá aè buu bboèñboñ ce e ce geèe neè weèe ka'. E geèe mbeèñ ce gweè, weèe ce koni byee njep nfeâ' mboèñmboñ, ce ye, ce yu', ce lu'shi.”	Yet he didn't leave himself without witness, in that he did good and gave you rains from the sky and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness."
Yuu ce m ce laèa yi yu ba ená muu ce e be ye bti' yïì taê, ka' bii munte, e ku ba aèmboè ñkwaèa, ka' bti' anaè yu vi wa'a.	But I say that so long as the heir is a child, he is no different from a bondservant, though he is lord of all;
E ce bèeŋger mbe bkuu waʼa njo kùu zhi ce yaŋ ye.	He is rolling on the bed like that because he has a painful leg.
Pitaè aè ka' rïìñ wa'a, a nati a du mbe ndaèp mbe Máèári, ma yïì Joân. A m ce too rlii Joân mo' ená Maêk. Beèe magoèr a m kaari mbo a ce geèe rloo.	Thinking about that, he came to the house of Mary, the mother of John whose surname was Mark, where many were gathered together and were praying.
Ncïìndap Nyúè ce e m laèa neè máè naè aè ker laa enáê, “Sañ blaèa ca: ‘Mboâñtu mi yu neè beèe ce a be woweèe aè ñkaâ' bguèu yi Muu Njeèe.’” E ker laa neè máè enáê, “Blaèa ca aè laèa ba Nyúè seeseê.”	"He said to me, ""Write, 'Blessed are those who are invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb.'"" He said to me, ""These are true words of God."""
Ku' beèe ca a ka' kuè yá ye, a bááñger seê, a cañse a du aè rcaè'ni ye.	Immediately all the multitude, when they saw him, were greatly amazed, and running to him greeted him.
Weèe fa ce no mruè' tá mi ce koo weèe ka'. Mi ka' ce koo weèe baná mi be ce bepsi weèe bepsi. Fa neè wee mnyor ba neè Yú' Nyúè tá yi bo ruu njep weâe mntee.	Don't be drunken with wine, in which is dissipation, but be filled with the Spirit,
Geewa'a, nfeè' moè' be ba ce a be koo nduu ese woweèe tá woweèe a ji mdip aè nfeè' anaè.”	"But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them. Then they will fast in those days."""
E sɛ̀r muu embe ntaʼ.	She has pulled the chair and dislocated the child from it.
Beèe magoèr a m byemi. Bbyeèñge Greâk ce ñgaâa mlii ba Greâk ce a m ba mmbañruè, a m byemi foñ.	Many of them therefore believed; also of the prominent Greek women, and not a few men.
Wɛ̀ kyese nlàa anà.	I have exaggerated the talk.
“Ndoèo! Ndoèo aè co' rla' rgoèr ca. AÈ m ba entoèmbïì rla' ca li m ba aèmboè njeñwáè ce e yar bcáâ' bboèñboñ ce vi m ce fúp, mo' vi ce baèñ. E m suèsi yïì nyor neè buu ce a m geèe neè gul ba bluèr ce vi ce laè'ñger.	saying, 'Woe, woe, the great city, she who was dressed in fine linen, purple, and scarlet, and decked with gold and precious stones and pearls!
E dù à rlor nè zhii bo.	She has gone to take it herself.
Ñwáè ce e ka' cu nteèe, byemi neè máè, baná ñgaèñ be cu nfeseè. Waè' wáè byemi a?”	"Whoever lives and believes in me will never die. Do you believe this?"""
E fa buu bboèñboñ neè beèe ce njeè ce yañ woweèe, a juu ñgaâa mbaèa, woweèe a duseè mboèmmbo.	He has filled the hungry with good things. He has sent the rich away empty.
Nòŋsi muu tɛ e bo buumi.	Lay down the child so that she can sleep.
Byú' bbebep vi m ce yá Jisoès aè nfeè' wááwá ku gweñger aè nsheè kuèntombïì neè ye, ce waani ce laa ená, “A wáè Muu Nyúè.”	"The unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, ""You are the Son of God!"""
Yú' yi laa neè Felep enáê, “Duè tee mutuè ca.”	"The Spirit said to Philip, ""Go near, and join yourself to this chariot."""
“Baná aède' m be'nïì beèe eluèuni na ba aè ká? Woweèe a yu aèmboè ká?	"To what then will I liken the people of this generation? What are they like?
Luke	Luêk	7	32	Woweèe a yu aèmboè bghaèrbeèe ce a cute aè ntaa, beèe a ce ká' beèe, beèe anaè wowo a ker ce ká' woweèe, a ce laèa enáê, ‘Weèr aè fyáp mndoñ neè weèe, weèe aè bii bii ka', weèr aè fa nceâ rkwe, weèe aè war ka'.’	They are like children who sit in the marketplace, and call one to another, saying, 'We piped to you, and you didn't dance. We mourned, and you didn't weep.'
Luke	Luêk	7	33	Máè laèa wa'a njobeè' Joân ñwáè baèptir beèe aè m vúè a ce ye yuu ka', a ce no mruè' ka', weèe aè laa weená nyúèrkaè' yu njep ye.	For John the Baptizer came neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and you say, 'He has a demon.'
Luke	Luêk	7	34	Muu Ñwáè aè vú yi a ka' ce ye buu, ce no buu, weèe aè laa weená, ‘Yá neè, ñwáè ca yu ñkuñri, a koo ñkar a ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè', ba ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.’	The Son of Man has come eating and drinking, and you say, 'Behold, a gluttonous man, and a drunkard; a friend of tax collectors and sinners!'
Luke	Luêk	7	35	Yi yu ená bfee vi ce duèñshi nyor aè njáèá njïì ce boo ñgaâa bfee a ce geèe yaèp buu.”	Wisdom is justified by all her children."
Baná weèe fúú efa waâp mú, táá jáá. Weèe fa joèo yuu ce yi yu rara ka' ka', tá m bo koni weèe.	"Therefore, ""'Come out from among them, and be separate,' says the Lord. 'Touch no unclean thing. I will receive you."
Ñwaè' ca ce sañ máâ Pol ce m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Nyúè a ker ba ñwáè ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. Nyúè aè m ce máè tá m bo jaè' beèe ce e ce, tá woweèe a bo byemi neè ye, rïìñ yuu mini ce aède' yi gee ñwáè cu rcu ce Nyúè koèñ.	Paul, a servant of God, and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God's chosen ones, and the knowledge of the truth which is according to godliness,
Saimún Pitaè aè m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “M be duè koo nca.” Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê, “Seèe be duè.” Woweèe a du a niñ mbe keñ aè rkoo nca, a ke' koo yuu neètú' anaè ka'.	"Simon Peter said to them, ""I'm going fishing."" They told him, ""We are also coming with you."" They immediately went out, and entered into the boat. That night, they caught nothing."
Woowèe a no mtɛɛ.	They have drank palm wine.
Woweèe a ka' duè, Tata Nyúè aè tuu yïì ncïìndap neè Josáèf aè rlo a laa neè ye enáê, “Naèti mbekïì lor muu ca ba yïì maê, cañ du aègho aè to' Ijïìp, cu aèfo caar tá m ke laèa neè wáè ená aè kúti, njobeè' Hároèd táá aè rroèo muu ca tá e bo yú.”	"Now when they had departed, behold, an angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, saying, ""Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and stay there until I tell you, for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him."""
Weèe aè maè'shi ená beèe a gee weèe aè wap bkwaèa, sop sá' efa weèe, nyúè' weèe, ko' weèe neè mkuèu mbe tuè, lip weèe neè mmbo nje mmïìr.	For you bear with a man, if he brings you into bondage, if he devours you, if he takes you captive, if he exalts himself, if he strikes you on the face.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè ñwáè moè' aè ba mbe shañ. A m too ye ená Baèrabaès. E m ba mbe shañ a beèe mo' ce a woweèe a m yúshi beèe aè nfeè' woweèe a m taè' buèr gopmáèn.	There was one called Barabbas, bound with those who had made insurrection, men who in the insurrection had committed murder.
Túè' aè ka' raa, beèe ce a m ku bii yap nje waâa túè a yá ená keñ aè m ku ba njo moè'sir. A m rïìñ ená ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a m niñ mbe keñ anaè a du mapñgi', Jisoès aè ba mbo ka'.	On the next day, the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea saw that there was no other boat there, except the one in which his disciples had embarked, and that Jesus hadn't entered with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples had gone away alone.
Bcɛ̀ʼ anà bvi bòŋŋger sê, laŋlaŋ zhǐi beer cà.	These clothes are very good, especially that red one.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè yá ye wáá, ñwáè ce e ce laèa neè wáè seè'ni na yu ye.”	"Jesus said to him, ""You have both seen him, and it is he who speaks with you."""
Woweèe a ká' a ce bipshi fa waâp mú ená ñwáè ce e be geèe njáèá yuu ca yu ba nda lá?	They began to question among themselves, which of them it was who would do this thing.
Wɛ̌ ke bòose muu ŋwɛ̀ ntèetu geekɛ e yuʼ kaʼ.	No matter the number of times you plead with a stubborn child, he doesnʼt listen.
E laa enáê, “Masaè, ñwáè aè geèe yuu neè máè ka'.” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M be geèe yuu mo' neè wáè foñ ka'. Duè yo yu, wáâ duè aè fa keèr geèe yuu bebep ka'.”]	"She said, ""No one, Lord."" Jesus said, ""Neither do I condemn you. Go your way. From now on, sin no more."""
Yáê, “M be vúè aèmboè nyáèá wa'a. Rboâñtu li yu neè ñwáè ce e ce buumi ka', a ce keè'ni vi bcáè', faè dïì' a lor vi, tá e lo kar mbuèuriñ tá rïìtu yi koo ye aè múè beèe ka'.”	Behold, I come like a thief. Blessed is he who watches, and keeps his clothes, so that he doesn't walk naked, and they see his shame.
Blaâa bbebep, bde' bcicïì ba ñkáèrbuu mbembep fa keè fúú eku weâe cuèu ka'. Buu ca yu yáánïì ka'. Weèe aè ba ce yoèñshi ba Nyúè.	nor filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not appropriate; but rather giving of thanks.
Weèe aè m ye ba njáèá sá' ká efa buu ce rïìtu yi ce koo weèe aègho seè'ni na? Sá' efa buu anaè yu ba rkwe.	What fruit then did you have at that time in the things of which you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
Woweèe a natïì mbekïì njaè' moè'sir, a kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, a ka' baè', a yá beèe ce ncoèp-moè'sir-aè-rrúèú, ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba, aèmboè a cute aèbee,	They rose up that very hour, returned to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and those who were with them,
Yaŋ ca zhi ghaʼshi banɛ sèe du àgho mbe ndàp mcɛ̀p.	This sickness is getting more serious therefore we should take it to the hospital.
Máèári ce aè rla' Makdalaè aè duê, a suñ ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès enáê, “Máè yá Tataê.” E m ker suñ woweèe buu ce e m laèa neè ye naè.	Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her.
Pitaè aè natïì a du a woweèe. E ka' duâ baè', a lor ye a du aègho mbe rum ndap yïì embekïì naè. Byepkúú wááwá a m táá a yeâ geñ, a ce war, a ce duèñshi bcáè' njáèá jáá jáèá jáá ce Dokaès aè m tar aè nfeè' ce e m bii nteèe.	Peter got up and went with them. When he had come, they brought him into the upper room. All the widows stood by him weeping, and showing the coats and garments which Dorcas had made while she was with them.
Wáè rïìñ ená káâ' aè nfeè' ce wáè m ba ghaèrñwáè vú gháá seè'ni na, wáè rïìñ blaèa embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè seê. AÈde' blaèa anaè vi gee aè túr bfee, byemi neè Jisos Kraêis, luêñ.	From infancy, you have known the holy Scriptures which are able to make you wise for salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus.
Yïì ma ba yïì ta a bááñgeèr seê. Jisoès aè laa ená woweèe a fa suñ ñwáè moè' yuu ce yi koni anaè ka'.	Her parents were amazed, but he commanded them to tell no one what had been done.
àmʉ̀ [àmɨ̀] prep.	among.
Máè m fyá' a yá máná e bú' ncir ka', a gee yuu mo' bebep ce aède' a m ba yú ye yú ka', aè ka' ba njobeè' e m koèñ ená Taèr Mañgoèñ sa' vi mnsa', máè laa máná m be tuusi ye neè ye.	But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death, and as he himself appealed to the emperor I determined to send him.
M ̀ kaʼ koŋ m̀ dû.	I will go if I wish.
Woweèe a ka' kuè bii ce suñ buu ca, Jisoès aè ku nyáá mbe waâp tar, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cumúnyañ ba neè weèe.”	"As they said these things, Jesus himself stood among them, and said to them, ""Peace be to you."""
Waè' aè be yoèñshi ñwáè rfaè' anaè njobeè' e ba gee yuu ce wáè ba laa ená e gee a?	Does he thank that servant because he did the things that were commanded? I think not.
Ñwáè rfaè' moè' aè ka' vúè, a laa yi enáê, ‘Masaè, a yo mbaèa caè na. Máè m ku kur njep kaâa cáè', a kupshi a noñsïî.	Another came, saying, 'Lord, behold, your mina, which I kept laid away in a handkerchief,
Ñwaè' ca aè sañ máâ nleeñwáè neè ñkaraâ Gayoès ce máè koèñ neè mini-ñwáè.	The elder to Gaius the beloved, whom I love in truth.
E ka' yá ená e geèe wa' nyor aè boñ Juês, e koo Pitaè foñ. Ca yi m koni aè nfeè' ce a m ce ye Ñkaâ' bráâd ce a láè yes njo ka'.	When he saw that it pleased the Jews, he proceeded to seize Peter also. This was during the days of unleavened bread.
Timotïì ka' vúê, weèe konïì ye boèñboñ seê, tá e bo wáp yuu mo' ka', njobeè' ye ye ce faè' foñ ba neè Tata aèmboè máè.	Now if Timothy comes, see that he is with you without fear, for he does the work of the Lord, as I also do.
Ca ce laèa ba Tata ce e m geèe beèe a riñ ca eluâuñgoèñ seê.	All his works are known to God from eternity.'
Wèr à yɛ̀rsi mambe.	We have swept the compound yard.
Maè' neè ncápntee, ba rshentee, ba ntee bebep, ba mlap, ba mnsa'ni. Ñwáè fa keèr yu' ryañ neè nfúr yïì ka'.	Let all bitterness, wrath, anger, outcry, and slander, be put away from you, with all malice.
Jisoès aè m ko' mbe rtuèu a ká' beèe ce e m koèñ, woweèe a vú a yá ye.	He went up into the mountain, and called to himself those whom he wanted, and they went to him.
Govanoè aè ka' beè' ñwaè' anaè, a bipshi neè Pol ená a ye ñwáâ aè ñgoèñ efá lá? E ka' yu' ená e yu ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Sïìlesïìyaè,	When the governor had read it, he asked what province he was from. When he understood that he was from Cilicia, he said,
E m laèa enáê, “Yáê, yaè ñwáè rfaè' ce máè ce, ñwáè ce máè koèñ seê, a ce yu' rboèñ neè ye. M be suèusi ya yú' mbe yeâ nduè tá e suñ aèmboè la rsa' neè beèe enje jáá.	"Behold, my servant whom I have chosen; my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased: I will put my Spirit on him. He will proclaim justice to the nations.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	19	E be sár mnsár a beèe, káè waani ka'. Ñwáè moè' be yu' yïì njeèndoñ aè btase ka'.	He will not strive, nor shout; neither will anyone hear his voice in the streets.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	20	E be kep ñke' ce yi búúti ka', káè liisi lam ce e ce fa ñgá' ka', caar tá e gee tá rsa' mini li so.	He won't break a bruised reed. He won't quench a smoking flax, until he leads justice to victory.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	21	Bto' wááwá vi be láè yap ntee ba njep ye.”	In his name, the nations will hope."
Máè yá beâe bgoèrgoèr ba beâe bká'ká' ce a m kweñger aèmboè a táá kuèntombïì neè kaèbaèraè' anaè. A m múè' mñwaè'. A m ker mú' ñwaè' mo', ñwaè' anaè aè ba ñwaâ' ryoèñ. Ñwáè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè' naè aè m fyá' mbe mñwaè' ce a m sañ mfaè' beèe ce a m kweñger anaè mbo, a teni mnsa' ñwáè wááwá aèmboè mi mfaè' mi m ba.	I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and they opened books. Another book was opened, which is the book of life. The dead were judged out of the things which were written in the books, according to their works.
Foèo Nyúè yi ce yááti ba njïì enjep muu yïì, seèe aè riñ njáèá ñwáè ce Nyúè yu ba njïì enjep ye, njobeè' e ku ba aèmboè Nyúè yu. Muu yïì ca ce loèr vi blaèa ce vi túr ñger seê, a ce geèe ñgoèñ ca yi ku bii aègho. E m loèr yïì nyor a gee tañshïì aègho tá e bo geèe tá Nyúè foosi seèe efa yïìseèe buu bbebep. E ka' geèe wa'a, a ko' mbe buèu, a cu aè bo maè' Nyúè ce yi kúú yi táá kuèntombïì.	His Son is the radiance of his glory, the very image of his substance, and upholding all things by the word of his power, when he had by himself made purification for our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high;
Mnoèñ vi ka' ba btaar, beèe mo' a ce geèe Ñkaâ' bguèu aè rla' Kánaè aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê. Ma yïì Jisoès aè m ba aèfo.	The third day, there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee. Jesus' mother was there.
Mñguu anaè vi m ba aèmboè mnyaèabaèraè' ce a ba'shi tá a bo duè bïìr aègho wa'a. Mtaa ce mñguu anaè vi m soèp mi feeseè mtaa kúú ce a geèe neè guêl. Wap bsii vi m feese bsii ñwáè.	The shapes of the locusts were like horses prepared for war. On their heads were something like golden crowns, and their faces were like people's faces.
Mɛ̀ koo mbàa ca ese ye.	I have taken this money from him.
Bbyèŋge bwap a ke cu ba njepmbè.	Their wives live out of the village.
Yi be kuè ba wa'a, aè noèñ ce Muu Ñwáè be yááti naè.	It will be the same way in the day that the Son of Man is revealed.
Wěmbùm a ke cu à ŋgǒŋ mjɛɛ.	People of Mbum live on grass-fields.
Ku' ñgaâa mbo' beèe a yu njep ñgoèñ, a ce kani ená Jisoès aè m beèeñger aè ñwáè, a vú njep ñgoèñ ka'. Njáèá ñwáè anaè yu ñwáè mbo' beèe, a ba ñwáè baèa Kraêis.	For many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who don't confess that Jesus Christ came in the flesh. This is the deceiver and the Antichrist.
AÈde' wá wáè foñ ku fyá' yá ená káâ' nyúè ce máè m duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè rloo neè Nyúè vú ba' ntïìni na, ku ba ba mnoèñ ncoèp baa-aè-rrúèú.	seeing that you can recognize that it is not more than twelve days since I went up to worship at Jerusalem.
A m kur ye mmir, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “Suñ ka ená aè lïìp nda wáè lá?”	"Having blindfolded him, they struck him on the face and asked him, ""Prophesy! Who is the one who struck you?"""
“Yi ka' ba ená moè' efa weèe túr ñwáè rfaè' ce e ce faè' nsuu, káè e ce cïìñ ba njeèe neè ye áè, e ka' kúti efa mñkúè, waè' aè be laèa neè ye enáê, ‘Vúè cárcár vú cu aè nsheè yeñger’ a?	But who is there among you, having a servant plowing or keeping sheep, that will say, when he comes in from the field, 'Come immediately and sit down at the table,'
A m̀ ̀ ba elǔuŋgòŋ bvisèe btaa a ce saŋ njɛ̀ɛ ŋwàʼ ca kaʼ.	In former times, our fathers were not writing like this.
jaè' weèe efa ñgá' ce weèe ce yá anaè, keèr jaè' weèr foñ efa ñgá'. E be geèe cena aè nfeè' ce Tata Jisoès ce vúè embe buèu neè ñger-ñwáè, a bcïìndap Nyúè weèe.	and to give relief to you who are afflicted with us, when the Lord Jesus is revealed from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming fire,
njobeè' e be keè ba ñwáâ ñgoèr aè bsii Tata Nyúè. E be keè no mruè' ka', no yuu tatap ka'. E be keè ruu neè Yú' Rara, ká' enjep rbúè yïì maê.	For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he will drink no wine nor strong drink. He will be filled with the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's womb.
Weèe rïìñ ená aè m ba aè nfeè' entombïì ce máè m feè'shi nsuñ mboèñmboñ neè weèe naè, máè m ce cu a weâe mú njobeè' máè m ce yañ.	but you know that because of weakness of the flesh I preached the Good News to you the first time.
Nïìkoèdámoès aè bipshïì enáê, “Ñwáè aè ka' ba nleeñwáè wáá, aède' a gee eká ka' ker bi ye? Waè' aède' e ker kúti njep rbúè yïì maê, a bi ye ñkaèraè' baa a?”	"Nicodemus said to him, ""How can a man be born when he is old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born?"""
Geèe laè neè buu ce vi be ce duèñshi ená weèe aè kupse, a ma' yeè buu bbebep. Weèe fa ce laèa fa weâe mú enáê, ‘Abraèham yu yeèr taê’ ka'. M ce suñ weèe ená aède' Nyúè ku lor bluèr ca beesi aè boo Abraèhaêm.	Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and don't begin to say among yourselves, 'We have Abraham for our father;' for I tell you that God is able to raise up children to Abraham from these stones!
Máè ka' fyá' a yá ku' mmbaâ' bbúú. Ñwáè moè' aè cu mbenduè mmbaè' anaè a ba aèmboè muu ñwáè wa'a. E m soèp rtaa kúú ce a geèe neè guêl, a túr saâ' ncáncáp mbaè boè.	I looked, and behold, a white cloud; and on the cloud one sitting like a son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
Weèe du cárcár du suñ ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená e fúú efa rkwe. E ce duè lá aè ñgoâñ Galeèle entombïì neè woweèe. Woweèe a be baè' aèfo tá a yá lá ye. A yuu ce máè suñ weèe.”	"Go quickly and tell his disciples, 'He has risen from the dead, and behold, he goes before you into Galilee; there you will see him.' Behold, I have told you."""
Weèr ce laèa buu ca aèmboè beèe ce a Jisos Kraâis weèe a yu aèbee, a riñ werná ku ba Nyúè ce e be jaè' weèr tá weèr ka' geèe buu ca.	Such confidence we have through Christ toward God;
Ñwáè wááwá be kuè byáè' yi ntáèr.	For each man will bear his own burden.
AÈmboè Taèr e ke geèe beèe ce a kweñger a fúú efa rkwe, cu bteèe, a mboè Muu ye ye e ke geèe beèe ce e ce, a cu bteèe aè njáâá wa' foñ.	For as the Father raises the dead and gives them life, even so the Son also gives life to whom he desires.
Yi yu ba ená ñwáè aè ka' lor wáè aè mnsa', weèe ye ka' ce duè mbe koêr, aè gheteèr weèe ye seesi mïìsi aè nduunjïì faè dïì' e bo loèr wáè duè aègho fa neè ñwáè nsa' mnsa', tá ñwáè nsa' mnsa' lor wáè fa neè ñwáè ncir, tá ñwáè ncir fa wáè mbe shañ ka'.	For when you are going with your adversary before the magistrate, try diligently on the way to be released from him, lest perhaps he drag you to the judge, and the judge deliver you to the officer, and the officer throw you into prison.
Ca a zhii mbʉ.	These are his goats.
Bèe wɛɛwɛ ku bii njep ndèetoʼ kaʼ.	Not every one is still practising tradition.
Mbuèu moè' yu aègho neè máè aè rroèo ñwáè tá e bo suñ beèe aèmboè máè ka'. Geewa'a m ce suñ weèe ená Joân aè m laèa aèmboè máè, tá weèe bo byemi, luèñ.	But the testimony which I receive is not from man. However, I say these things that you may be saved.
Weèe rïìñ weená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce a m yuu weèe efa ndeèe to' ce weêe bta a m láè neè weèe, sá' aè ba njo ka' naè, a m yuu weèe ba neè buu ce nlo e ke koo aègho aèmboè mbaèa na ka'.	knowing that you were redeemed, not with corruptible things, with silver or gold, from the useless way of life handed down from your fathers,
Yi yu aèmboè ñgúè mostaè ce ñwáè aè m byeè mbe yeâ ñka', yi lo a ku' a ba aè ce, bsiñ vi ba'rïì mndap aè mnta' efa gho.”	"It is like a grain of mustard seed, which a man took, and put in his own garden. It grew, and became a large tree, and the birds of the sky lodged in its branches."""
AÈ ka' ba aè mbuèuñkuèr, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a du aèwaâa túè,	When evening came, his disciples went down to the sea,
Pitaè aè m ku bii ce señ aèmboè rlo ce e m yá naè, Yú' yi laa neè ye enáê, “Yáê, beèe a mntaar a ce roèo wáè.	"While Peter was pondering the vision, the Spirit said to him, ""Behold, three men seek you."
Geèe tá yïìseèe beèe a lor yaèp nfeè' ce geèe ba buu bboèñboñ tá woweèe a bo koni buu ce vi be jaè' woweèe keèr jaè' beèe mo' foñ. Woweèe a fa loèr yaèp nfeè' búsi ba aè cicïì ka'.	Let our people also learn to maintain good works for necessary uses, that they may not be unfruitful.
Gayoès, ce m ce cu mbe yeâ ndaèp, ñgaâa rbyemïì a ce niñ cor mbo foñ naè aè caè'ni weèe. ÁÈrastoès ce e ce láè mbaèa to' naè ba Kwatoès a caè'ni weèe.	Gaius, my host and host of the whole assembly, greets you. Erastus, the treasurer of the city, greets you, as does Quartus, the brother.
A sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Weèe ka' yu' njeèndoñ Nyúè ntïìni, weèe fa teèe tu aèmboè weêe bta a m teèe neè Nyúè, a kani efa rgeèe yuu ce e m laèa naè ka'.”	"while it is said, ""Today if you will hear his voice, don't harden your hearts, as in the rebellion."""
Wèr tʉr koosimnses nè ye.	We have sympathy for him.
Rfàʼ anà li yu àtɛ̀r.	That job is not tedious.
Ntaaŋguu ntatap e ke kepti jòr kaʼ.	A strong wood cannot break easily.
Nsuñ mboèñmboñ ca kuèu muu yïì ce Jisos Kraâis ce e yu Tata neè seèe. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè li rbi, a m bi ye mbe ndúè' Dávïìd.	concerning his Son, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh,
Pitaè aè m fúr woweèe wááwá njepmbeè a gú'shi a loo; a karsi nyor a ke' gúâú ñwáè, a laa enáê, “Taèbitaè, naèti mbekïì.” E m múè' mi mmir a ka' yá Pitaè, a nati a cu mbekïì.	"Peter put them all out, and kneeled down and prayed. Turning to the body, he said, ""Tabitha, get up!"" She opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter, she sat up."
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' Musïìs aè m suñ beèe mncir ce Nyúè aè m fa neè woweèe wááwá, a lor mnyoâr njeèe ce vi m ce baèñ, a cúú aè fuè ce a too ená Hisoèp, a fúú njep bláá muu naè' ce a m fïìñshi neè mdip, a ñwañshi mbenduè ñwaè' mncir a ker ñwañshi beèe wááwá aègho.	For when every commandment had been spoken by Moses to all the people according to the law, he took the blood of the calves and the goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, and sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
Máè m geèe buu bghagha' ce vi ke duèñshi ená ñwáè yu ñwáè ntuu Jisoès naè a weâe mú, a ke' borni aè nfeè' moè' ka'.	Truly the signs of an apostle were worked among you in all patience, in signs and wonders and mighty works.
Ñwáâ ñgoèr se efa weâe mú be ba ba ñwáè rfaè' neè weèe.	But he who is greatest among you will be your servant.
Hároèd aè ka' yá ená ñgaâa bfee ekuè mbuèuntii a bo' ye, ntee yi yañ ye seê, e fa rsa' ená a yúshi boo mmbañruè wááwá ce a káè' embe bfeâ' bbaa kúti njïìnjïì ce a yu aè rla' Bátáèláèháêm, ker ba aè mú mla' ce mi yu aègee rla' ca. E m fa rsa' wa'a, njobeè' bfeè' vi m ba aèmboè bbaa, ká' embe nfeè' ce ñgaâa bfee ekuè mbuèuntii a m yá rkaèñsïì ce a m suñ ye ená a yá naè.	Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and sent out, and killed all the male children who were in Bethlehem and in all the surrounding countryside, from two years old and under, according to the exact time which he had learned from the wise men.
E m bɛ̀ɛ mndap ce e m yɛ mbà Bùyà.	He was impressed by the houses he saw at Buea.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè ñwáè ce e túr ñgwa, e ke kwaè'shi aèmboè buu enjep ñgoèñ ce roèo ená e gee nyor boñ ñgwa yïì.	but he who is married is concerned about the things of the world, how he may please his wife.
Ŋgòŋ zhi yu jʉ̀ʉ.	The weather is dull.
Baná seèe gheter ce gee ba buu ce vi be geèe tá seèe cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè, keèr geèe tá seèe ce kuè' aèbee.	So then, let us follow after things which make for peace, and things by which we may build one another up.
Weèr yaè Ta yu ñwáè moè'sir.”	"I and the Father are one."""
caar duè baè' aè nfeè' ce seèe be ba ñwáè moè'sir aè liseèe rbyemïì ker ba aè buu ce seèe aè rïìñ aèmboè Muu Nyúè. Seèe ka' cu wa'a, yi gee seèe gháá, misi ba yáánïì aèmboè Kraâis yu naè.	until we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a full grown man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ;
A m fa Baèrabaès aè shañ njobeè' e m barsi beâe aè rla' anaè ená a tee tu neè ñkwe Ruêm, a ker yú ñwáè foñ.	one who was thrown into prison for a certain revolt in the city, and for murder.
Timotïì aè kúti a vú a yá weèr a suñ weèr nsuñ mboèñmboñ. E suñ weèr ená le rbyemïì li ku bii tatap, weèe aè ku koñ Nyúè aèmboè weèe aè m koèñ naè. E suñ foñ ená weèe túr weèr aè ntee boèñboñ, a ce koèñ aè ryá weèr aèmboè weèr ce koèñ aè ryá weèe foñ naè.	But when Timothy came just now to us from you, and brought us glad news of your faith and love, and that you have good memories of us always, longing to see us, even as we also long to see you;
M ce suñ weèe máná be keèe ba aè noâñ mnsa' tá beèe a laa yuu kuèu blaèa bcicïì wááwá ce woweèe a m laèa,	I tell you that every idle word that men speak, they will give account of it in the day of judgment.
Ka' m yu aènjïìsaèp wa'a, seèe ku ba aèbee enjep ntee. M ce lu'shi njobeè' máè yu' máná weèe yu aèbee, a ku táá tatap aè rbyemïì ce weèe aè m byemi neè Jisos Kraêis.	For though I am absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, rejoicing and seeing your order, and the steadfastness of your faith in Christ.
Wèr ye à fʉ a gee mbɛp.	We went out and talked.
Ñwáè ce e túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.”	"He who has ears to hear, let him hear."""
Cena yi yu ená Jisoès yu ñwáè ce e geèe leè' ce Nyúè aè ye seèe woweèe naè yi tap a caa leâ' rúèú.	By so much, Jesus has become the collateral of a better covenant.
weèe fa maè'shi tá ñwáè moè' bo' weèe ka' aè njáâá ká ka'. Tá noèñ ca yi ka' ba, nteèetu ce aèlúèsimbuèu be ba, tá ñwáè ce e baèa Kraâis vúê. Ca yu ñwáè ce e bú yi wáá.	Let no one deceive you in any way. For it will not be, unless the departure comes first, and the man of sin is revealed, the son of destruction,
Weèr ce feè'shi ba aèmboè Jisos Kraâis ce a m taa mbe kïìntaa. Rfeè'shïì ca li ce jepsi Jus efa rbyemi neè ye, aè ba blúr neè beèe enje jáá.	but we preach Christ crucified; a stumbling block to Jews, and foolishness to Greeks,
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè be niñ aè múè rla' ka'. E m ku bii ba mbe dïì' ce Maataè aè m duè a yá ye naè.	Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha met him.
E ka' laèa wa' mïìsi, Nyúè aè lor ye a du aègho mbe buèu, woweèe a táá a ce fyá', mmbaè' vi vú a cete ye, woweèe a ke' ker yá ye ka'.	When he had said these things, as they were looking, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight.
Woweèe a ka' kúti mbe ndaèp, ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a ker bipshi yuu kuu yuu ce e m laèa anaè.	In the house, his disciples asked him again about the same matter.
Ñwáè aè ka' túr ntee aè rfa, Nyúè be koo ba yuu ce ñwáè anaè túr, ke' ba ba yuu ce e buu ka'.	For if the readiness is there, it is acceptable according to what you have, not according to what you don't have.
Máè ka' fyá' a yá waèawa mñkuèr aèmboè e ce fáñ mbe buèu. E ka' ce fáñ wa'a, a waa enáê, “Ñgá', ñgá', ñgá'.” Bcïìndap Nyúè ce a báti a taar naè a be loè fyáp msoèñ map tá yi ba bebep neè beèe ce a ce cu njep ñgoèñ.	"I saw, and I heard an eagle, flying in mid heaven, saying with a loud voice, ""Woe! Woe! Woe for those who dwell on the earth, because of the other voices of the trumpets of the three angels, who are yet to sound!"""
Jisoès aè m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè ta ce faè' aè nfeè' wááwá. Má máè ce faè' aè njáâá wa'a.”	"But Jesus answered them, ""My Father is still working, so I am working, too."""
E ba waŋ mɛ̀ nè bo à tu entombì.	He slapped me on the jaw first.
Muu wèr tèetu sê.	Our child is very stubborn.
Ñwáè moè' ka' ker fe'shi nsuñ mboèñmboñ moè' ce e yu jáá efa yïì ce weèr aè m feè'shi neè weèe naè, ndoèo co' ye. Ka' aè ba fe'shi ba weèr áè, káè ncïìndap Nyúè embe buèu áè, ndoèo co' ñgaèñ.	"But even though we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you any ""good news"" other than that which we preached to you, let him be cursed."
Jisoès aè m ba aè rla' Bátanïì mbe ndaèp mbe Saimúèn ñwáè msaèasïì. A ka' ce ye byee, njeñwáè moè' aè niñ neè mú njáèá ntúñ bluèr moè'. Njáèá mgúr mo' ce mi m ce rúèú boèñboñ, a luu ntaa seê, mi ba njo jiñ. E bú' ndoo mú ntúñ anaè a cu'ni mgúr enjo mbe tu Jisoès.	While he was at Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat at the table, a woman came having an alabaster jar of ointment of pure nard--very costly. She broke the jar, and poured it over his head.
M ̀ be boŋshi kwaa fàdìʼ njè bo lò koo mɛ̀ kaʼ.	I will economise corn so that I would not suffer from hunger.
Mtàʼsi mi ke koʼ nè mbèŋ kaʼ.	Edible beetles donʼt come out in the rainy season.
Woweèe a maè'shi njïû yáánïì a du ba aè njïû mbembep. Woweèe a loèr ba njïì yïì Balaèm ce e m ba muu Beyoè. Balaèm ca aè m koèñ aè rgeèe yuu bebep tá e bo koni mbaèa.	forsaking the right way, they went astray, having followed the way of Balaam the son of Beor, who loved the wages of wrongdoing;
Ñger ce Joân aè m túr aè rbaèptir beèe naè yi m loè ba efá? Yi m loè ba ese Nyúè káè ese beèe?” Woweèe a du mcúè, a seesi a laa enáê, “Seèe aè ka' laa seenáê, yi ñger anaè yi m loè ese Nyúè, baná e be bipshi neè seèe enáê, ‘Weèe aè m ka' ba byemi yuu ce e m laèa ka' njoká?’	"The baptism of John, where was it from? From heaven or from men?"" They reasoned with themselves, saying, ""If we say, 'From heaven,' he will ask us, 'Why then did you not believe him?'"
Nyúè aè ka' foosi beèe efa yaèp buu bbebep, mbuèu moè' ker ba aègho neè woweèe aè rtañshi tañshïì tá yi bo siñsi yaèp buu bbebep ka'.	Now where remission of these is, there is no more offering for sin.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè Jisos Kraêis, e m ku tañshi tañshïì yi nfeè' moè'sir, Tañshïì anaè yi túr ñger aè rsiñsi buu bbebep ce beèe a geèe, nfeseè. E ka' tañshi tañshïì ca wáá, a du a cu aè bo ma' Nyúè.	but he, when he had offered one sacrifice for sins forever, sat down on the right hand of God;
Mɛ̀ caŋ a ku kone bɛbɛʼ efa nlàa ce e ba lâa.	I rushed and just got a fraction of what he said.
Gee ne wa'a, Jisoès a ñwáè ce e m ce baèptir beèe ka'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ca a beèe ce a m ce baèptir beèe neè ye.	(although Jesus himself didn't baptize, but his disciples),
Nyúè aè m fúr Jisoès ca efa rkwe, weèr aè yá ye neè mer mmir foñ.	This Jesus God raised up, to which we all are witnesses.
Loèr nfeè' neè ye njobeè' e m jepsi blaâa Nyúè ce weèr aè m ce feè'shi naè seê.	of whom you also must beware; for he greatly opposed our words.
Weèe aè ka' du niñ ka' mbe ndaèp ce efá, weèe ku cu ba mbo, nati ba embo ka' du aè rla' mo'.	Into whatever house you enter, stay there, and depart from there.
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Jus a m ce tami nyor nyúè anaè tá a bo fúú cu mmbomntaa, a lá ye njep rsheè anaè, njobeè' li m ba aètútú.	Then because of the Jews' Preparation Day (for the tomb was near at hand) they laid Jesus there.
Weèe be laèa wa'a, tá e duñshi weèe rum ndap moè' ñgoèr mbenduè ndap anaè, ce a kupshi, a fa buu mbo wááwá. Weèe fár byee ñkaè' ca mbo.”	"He will himself show you a large upper room furnished and ready. Get ready for us there."""
Beèe Saduèsi mo' ce a m kani ená aède' ñwáè kwe ker fúú efa rkwe ka', a vú a yá Jisoès tá a bo bipshi yuu neè ye. Woweèe a laa neè ye enáê,	Some of the Sadducees came to him, those who deny that there is a resurrection.
Yàp njè embe Ŋkambɛ̀ʼ à vʉ̀.	Their elder brother of Nkambe has come.
Baná beèe ce a Jisos Kraâis weèe a yu aèbee a be keèr gweè mnsa' ka',	There is therefore now no condemnation to those who are in Christ Jesus, who don't walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit.
Ncïìndap aè nyáá mbe waâp nduè, rraa Tata li suu mbe waâp nduè, woweèe a wáp seê.	Behold, an angel of the Lord stood by them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them, and they were terrified.
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce nyoñ ba mmbee, baná ñgaèñ ku bii munte, a be lááte aè ryá'nïì ce li yu aèmboè aède' ñwáè ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè ka'.	For everyone who lives on milk is not experienced in the word of righteousness, for he is a baby.
Mú fu' mo' yi ce vúè embaè mbuèuñgoèñ, woweèe a kwa'shïì ená a koni yuu ce a ce roèo. Woweèe a súñ ma co' ce keñ aè m táá aègho a lá mbe keñ a co'ti a ce duè aèwaâa roâ aè to' Kreêt.	When the south wind blew softly, supposing that they had obtained their purpose, they weighed anchor and sailed along Crete, close to shore.
Ñwáè aè ka' juu ñgwa yïì, lor ñgwa moè' baná e koo ñgwa ñwáè moè'. Ñwáè ce e ka' lor njeñwáè ce nduu aè juèu, baná e koo ñgwa ñwáè moè' foñ.	Everyone who divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery. He who marries one who is divorced from a husband commits adultery.
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè weèe, Kraâis aè fa weèe Yú' Rara, weèe wááwá aè yi buu ce mini.	You have an anointing from the Holy One, and you all have knowledge.
Woweèe a m be riñ yap yu yuu ce a m sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè ená Jisoès be fúú efa rkwe naè ka'.	For as yet they didn't know the Scripture, that he must rise from the dead.
Mú mnoèñ mo' vi ka' caèa, Máèári aè natïì a du cárcár mbe rla' mo' ce li m ba mbe mtuâu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè.	Mary arose in those days and went into the hill country with haste, into a city of Judah,
Máèári e aè rla' Makdalaè ba Máèári ma yïì Joseès a m ba aèfo, a yá mbe dïì' ce a tuñ Jisoès.	Mary Magdalene and Mary, the mother of Joses, saw where he was laid.
AÈde' a yoñshïì wáè aè njáâá ká, ce aè ka' gee yuu bebep, a lip wáè, aè kur ntee. Wáè ka' ce yá ñgá' njobeè' yuu boèñboñ ce wáè geèe, ku kur ntee, baná Nyúè be yu' rboèñ neè wáè.	For what glory is it if, when you sin, you patiently endure beating? But if, when you do well, you patiently endure suffering, this is commendable with God.
Ñwáè ce e ka' suñ aè bsii beèe ená e yu yaè ñwáè baná má máè foñ be suñ aè bsii yaè Ta embe buèu ená e yu yaè ñwáè.	Everyone therefore who confesses me before men, him I will also confess before my Father who is in heaven.
jaè' laè yo tu suu embe kïìntaa.”	"save yourself, and come down from the cross!"""
Wɛ̀ jani ba kɛ waʼa?	Why are you staring in a preoccupied manner?
Beèe ca a ce koèñ ená a so weèe, koo weèe aè mbeèp yaèp. A ce koèñ aè rso weèe ba aè yuu boèñboñ ka'. Woweèe a ce koèñ ená seèe gaèpni tá weèe bo koèñ ba woweèe.	They zealously seek you in no good way. No, they desire to alienate you, that you may seek them.
Baná weèe koo bfúr mo' nje nyoèr a weâe mú aèmboè Kraâis aè m koo seèe foñ na, tá beèe a bo ce kuè'si Nyúè.	Therefore accept one another, even as Christ also accepted you, to the glory of God.
Káè yu bgovanoè áè, weèe yu'ni neè woweèe aèmboè beèe ce ñkúú aè tuusi tá a bo fa ñgá' neè ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep, yoèñshi beèe ce a geèe buu bboèñboñ.	or to governors, as sent by him for vengeance on evildoers and for praise to those who do well.
Yi yu wa' ka'. Beèe ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ke tañshi yap tañshïì ba neè mnyúâmkaè'. Woweèe a ke tañshi tañshïì ca ba neè Nyúè ka'. M ce koèñ máná weèe mnyúâmkaè' weèe ba ñwáè moè'sir ka'.	But I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons, and not to God, and I don't desire that you would have fellowship with demons.
A ke màʼ bìr bèe kweŋger gòr sê.	When a war is fought many people die.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè, weèe aè ka' tá ye nyor Muu Ñwáè, keèr no vi bláá ka', weèe konïì ryoèñ ka'.	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you, unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you don't have life in yourselves."
Ñwáè yá'ni buu Jisoès ce Jisoès aè m koèñ se naè aè laa neè Pitaè enáê, “A Tataê.” Pitaè aè ka' yu' ená a Tataê, a ma' cáè' aè nyoèr njobeè' e m co'ni bcáè' efa nyoèr. E ka' maè' wáá, a nyáá embe keñ a coo njep roè a du a yá Jisoès.	"That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved said to Peter, ""It's the Lord!"" So when Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he wrapped his coat around him (for he was naked), and threw himself into the sea."
Weèe táá ye ba aègee rtuèu ce a too ená Sayoèn. Weèe aè baè' aè rla' Nyúè ce e yu nteèe. A too rla' anaè enáê, “Jáèrusaláèm yïû mbekïì”. Bcïìndap Nyúè ce aède' ñwáè be' ka', a yu mbo a ce lu'shi.	But you have come to Mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to innumerable multitudes of angels,
yoñshi neè Nyúè aè buu wááwá ce vi ka' koni weèe. Buu ca a buu ce Nyúè ce koèñ ená beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Jisos Kraâis a geêe.	In everything give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus toward you.
Woweèe a ka' duè cep, beèe anaè a lor yap yu ntuu anaè aètáèr, a du ba aè rgeèe yaèp ntaè'teè, beèe mo' aè du aè mñkúè, beèe mo' a du aè rkap yaèp ntaa.	But they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise,
E m loèr ye a ye a du a yá Jisoès. Jisoès aè ke' Saimúèn a laa enáê, “Wáâ Saimúèn ce aè yu muu Joân, a be too wáè ená Káfaès.” Rlii ce ená Káfaès na li ku ba foñ aèmboè rlii ce li yu ená Pitaè naè.	"He brought him to Jesus. Jesus looked at him, and said, ""You are Simon the son of Jonah. You shall be called Cephas"" (which is by interpretation, Peter)."
Cep boo mnsuènsuè foñ ená woweèe a fa maè'shi wap mnyor aèwaèa ka'.	Likewise, exhort the younger men to be sober minded;
Ñwáâ ñgoèr ca aè laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, máè ghááte aè ñwáè ce aède' aè niñ mbe máâ ndaèp ka'. Kuè laa ba mbúè nlaèa moè'sir tá yaè ñwáè rfaè' ke'se.	"The centurion answered, ""Lord, I'm not worthy for you to come under my roof. Just say the word, and my servant will be healed."
Ryoèñ ce nfeseè ca li yu ba ená ñwáè riñ wáè, ce ku ba ba wáè caè'caè' ce aè yu Nyúè mini, ker riñ Jisos Kraâis ce wáè tuu njep ñgoèñ na.	This is eternal life, that they should know you, the only true God, and him whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
E ka' vúè koni weèr aèfo, weèr aè koo ye mbe keñ weèr woweèe a du aè rla' Mitileèn.	When he met us at Assos, we took him aboard, and came to Mitylene.
Yu'ni neè neè wee btu, njobeè' weèe yu beèe ce weèe ce gú'shi neè Kraêis.	subjecting yourselves one to another in the fear of Christ.
Rïìñ neè ená weèe Jisos Kraâis weèe ka' ba aèbee, weèe túr buu wááwá njobeè' e yu tu neè byú' wááwá ce vi túr ñger.	and in him you are made full, who is the head of all principality and power;
Beèe ce a láè ntee aè rgeèe buu bboèñboñ aè nfeè' wááwá, a lá mmir mbenduè bkuè' ese Nyúè ba ryu'nïì ba ryoèñ ce nfeseè, Nyúè be geèe tá woweèe a cu nfeseè.	to those who by patience in well-doing seek for glory, honor, and incorruptibility, eternal life;
Yi boèñ ená m túr njáèá mkwaè'shïì ca kuu weèe, njobeè' m túr weèe aè ntee boèñboñ. Weèe aè m koni máè aè rfaâ' rboèñboñ ce Nyúè aè m fa máè. Weèe aè m koni máè aè nfeè' ce máè m táá a ce feè'shi, a ker ce saèr Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ neè beèe, ker ba seè'ni ce m yu mbe shañ na.	It is even right for me to think this way on behalf of all of you, because I have you in my heart, because, both in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the Good News, you all are partakers with me of grace.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ yuu ce woweèe a m túr aè mbúè, a laa enáê, “Weèe ce weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni, weèe ce moèoshi máè njoká?	"But Jesus perceived their wickedness, and said, ""Why do you test me, you hypocrites?"
ená nfeè' e seè'ni na ka' gháá aèmboè e gháá na tá e bo loèr cor geèe tá beèe embe buèu ce a yu btu, ba bcïìndap Nyúè ce bgoèrgoèr a riñ bfee ce Nyúè túr aè buu wááwá.	to the intent that now through the assembly the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principalities and the powers in the heavenly places,
E ba koo mbàa anà a lɛ̂ àmbommi.	He took the money and kept it on his own.
Jus a m doèori AÈláèksandaè a tár kuèntombïì neè beèe, a laa neè ye ená e laa yuu. AÈláèksandaè aè naa bo mbekïì ená beèe a cu nyañ tá e laa yuu.	They brought Alexander out of the multitude, the Jews putting him forward. Alexander beckoned with his hand, and would have made a defense to the people.
Yuu ce yi m koni ñwáâ nlee naè, yi m koni neè ñwáè embe yeâ njïì, a koni neè ñwáè embe njïì ñwáè embe yeâ njïì, a caasi moè' efa bfúr beèe nsaèamba anaè ka'.	In the same way, the second also, and the third, to the seventh.
Woweèe a ku ce waani, a ce laèa ená a taa lá ye mbe kïìntaa. A ka' waani wa'a, a so.	But they were urgent with loud voices, asking that he might be crucified. Their voices and the voices of the chief priests prevailed.
Woweèe a bipshi wa'a, tá e beesi enáê, ‘M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená aèmboè weèe aè m jaè' ka' mú ñwáâ ñká' efa múè bfúr wa ca ka' na, baná weèe aè m jaè' máè ka'.’	"Then he will answer them, saying, 'Most certainly I tell you, inasmuch as you didn't do it to one of the least of these, you didn't do it to me.'
Matthew	Matïìyoè	25	46	E laèa wa'a, tá woweèe a du niñ njep ñgá' ce nfeseè, tá beâe byáánïì a du cu rcu ce nfeseè.”	These will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life."
Ñwáè ce e geèe seèe aè túr bfee bboèñboñ ku ba Jisoès caè'caè'. Njáèá bfee ca vi túr sá' seê.	in whom are all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hidden.
Nyúè aè m geèe woweèe a riñ ená buu ce woweèe a m ce suñ beèe aè m ba buu ce vi be koni aè nfeè' yaèp ka'. E m geèe woweèe a riñ ená vi be koni ba aè nfeâ' yïì. AÈ ka' ba seè'ni na, beèe ce a m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Jisos Kraâis neè weèe aè ñger Yú' Rara, ce a m tuu embe buèu, a suñ weèe buu anaè. Bcïìndap Nyúè foñ a ce koèñ aè rfyá' nje múè buu ca.	To them it was revealed, that not to themselves, but to you, they ministered these things, which now have been announced to you through those who preached the Good News to you by the Holy Spirit sent out from heaven; which things angels desire to look into.
À ce kòŋ enɛ m fa ba nè wɛ̀ a?	Do you prefer that I should rather give it to you?
Yi ku ba wa' foñ neè buu bboèñboñ ce beèe a ce geèe. Buu bboèñboñ ce beèe mo' a ce geèe vi loè yañse yááti. Buu bboèñboñ ce beèe mo' a ce geèe vi loè lor nfeè' ka' yááti. Geewa'a aède' vi lo buu efa ryáátïì ka'.	In the same way also there are good works that are obvious, and those that are otherwise can't be hidden.
E m laèa enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñgwañkúñwáè ce e yu ñwáè fuèp na, aè fa a caa beèe wááwá.	"He said, ""Truly I tell you, this poor widow put in more than all of them,"
Awá Pitaè aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Rabaèi yi boèñ aèmboè seèe yu aèfa na. Maè'shi tá weèr ba'ri btaâp btaar, tá mo' ba yo, tá mo' ba yi Musïìs, tá mo' ba yi AÈlajaè.”	"Peter answered Jesus, ""Rabbi, it is good for us to be here. Let's make three tents: one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah."""
Woweèe a bááñgeèr seê, a laa a waâp mú enáê, “Blaèa ñwáè ca vi yu ba aè njáâá ká? E ce laèa neè byú' bebep neè ñger-ñwáè, vi ce fúúse enjep beèe.”	"Amazement came on all, and they spoke together, one with another, saying, ""What is this word? For with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out!"""
Ntee yi yañ ñkúú seê, e tuu vi bsoogáè, woweèe a du a yúshi beèe ce a m yúshi yi ñgaâa mfaè' naè, a too lap rla'.	When the king heard that, he was angry, and sent his armies, destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.
Be ba haʼntìni tɛ m̀ du ntaa.	Next week I shall go to the market.
Mlap ba bkoèr ce vi yu a weâe mú na vi loè efá? Mboè vi yu ba njobeè' weèe ce tañ buu njep weâe mntee a?	Where do wars and fightings among you come from? Don't they come from your pleasures that war in your members?
AÈ ka' ba aè mú ñgaèptú', e ka' naèti ce kúti aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, njeè aè ce yañ ye.	Now in the morning, as he returned to the city, he was hungry.
Háèrodïìyaè aè ka' yu', a baa Joân seê. E m roèo aè ryú Joân, geewa'a njïì yi buu,	Herodias set herself against him, and desired to kill him, but she couldn't,
Woweèe a m ce jepsi weèr efa rfeè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè beèe enje jáá. A m ce geèe wa'a a ce jepsi beèe enje jáá anaè efa ryu' nsuñ ce e be geèe tá woweèe a luêñ. AÈmboè woweèe a ce geèe wa' naè, yaèp buu bbebep aè ku ce kuè'. AÈ ka' ba aèlúèsimbuèu Nyúè aè ma' ñgá' mbe waâp nduè.	forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles that they may be saved; to fill up their sins always. But wrath has come on them to the uttermost.
Yee tu rfàʼ zhi yû?	Where is your master?
Yi yu ená aè m ba aè nfeè' ce seèe aè m rïìñ aè rjaè' viseèe btu ka' naè, Kraâis aè vú aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m láè, a kwe a seâe btuè ce seèe yu ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep.	For while we were yet weak, at the right time Christ died for the ungodly.
AÈristakoès ce weèr ye yu mbe shañ, aè caè'ni weèe. Mak ce e yu nfúr Baènabaès aè caè'ni weèe foñ. Máè fa weèe ncep aèmboè Mak wáá. Máè suñ weèe ená e ka' vúê, weèe konïì ye boèñboñ.	"Aristarchus, my fellow prisoner, greets you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (concerning whom you received commandments, ""if he comes to you, receive him""),"
Geèe neè tá ñgaâa byaâñ aèfo a ke'se, laa neè neè beèe wááwá enáê, ‘Kúú Nyúè yi vúè, a ba aètútú neè weèe.’	Heal the sick who are therein, and tell them, 'The Kingdom of God has come near to you.'
Mɛ̀ tuu muu mbà ro.	I have sent a child to the stream.
Bʉbʉ zhi ke mì banɛ a be càŋsi ŋkʉʉ ce a ghar.	When ever the chiefʼs funeral is over, they bring out the newly crowned chief.
Nyúè aè m ce laèa aèmboè leâ' fi wa'a baná e m geèe leè' entoèmbïì yi kútïì yuu rúèú. Yuu yi ka' kúti rúèú, beeñger aè yuu cicïì, baná yuu anaè yi be bú.	"In that he says, ""A new covenant,"" he has made the first old. But that which is becoming old and grows aged is near to vanishing away."
Njáèá buu bbebep ca vi ke loè ba enjep ntee: bsaèkïì, byáèá, nyúshi beèe, aè rkoo ñgwa ñwáè moè' káè nduu ñwáè moè',	For from within, out of the hearts of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, sexual sins, murders, thefts,
“Weèe fa maè'shi tá wee mntee vi ce fa weèe ñgá' ka', weèe byemi neè Nyúè, ker byemi neè máè foñ.	"Don't let your heart be troubled. Believe in God. Believe also in me.
John	Joân	14	2	Bdïì' vi yu mbe ndaèp yaè Ta goèr seê. Yi ka' tá baè ba wa' ka', máè m ba suñ weèe. M ce duè aè rkupshi dïì' neè weèe.	In my Father's house are many homes. If it weren't so, I would have told you. I am going to prepare a place for you.
John	Joân	14	3	M ka' du kupshi dïì' neè weèe, m kútïì vú lor weèe tá seèe duê, tá weèe bo ba foñ faèdïì' ce m yu.	If I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again, and will receive you to myself; that where I am, you may be there also.
John	Joân	14	4	Weèe rïìñ nduunjïû faèdïì' ce m ce duè anaè.”	Where I go, you know, and you know the way."
E niñ a cu a woweèe mbe keñ, awá fu' caè yi teetïì. Woweèe a bááñgeèr seê,	He got into the boat with them; and the wind ceased, and they were very amazed among themselves, and marveled;
Nsuñ kuu yuu ce Jisoès aè m geèe na aè m duè aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè wááwá ker ba aè mla' ce mi m sïìr ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a kaari a tarte.	This report went out concerning him in the whole of Judea, and in all the surrounding region.
Túè' aè ka' raa, Jisoès aè fúú efa rla' anaè a du aè dïì' ce e be kuè ba mimñgi'. Beèe a ká' a ce roèo ye, a ka' yá ye, a koñ ená e ku cu a woweèe.	When it was day, he departed and went into an uninhabited place, and the multitudes looked for him, and came to him, and held on to him, so that he wouldn't go away from them.
E m duè a yá Pailáèt, a bu' mmbo neè ye ená e fa gúâú ñwáè neè ye tá e tuñ.	this man went to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body.
E m byemi ená ñwáè ker byá' yuu to'ni aègho aè mambe Ndap Nyúè ka'.	He would not allow anyone to carry a container through the temple.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Vúè neè ye yuu.” Ñwáè moè' efa múè woweèe aè túr ntee aè rbipshi neè Jisoès ená a ye nda lá ka'. Woweèe a m rïìñ ená a Tataê.	"Jesus said to them, ""Come and eat breakfast."" None of the disciples dared inquire of him, ""Who are you?"" knowing that it was the Lord."
Woweèe a baashïì bbábá' bráâd anaè aèbee. Bbábá' ce vi m báti vi m ruu aè mñkaèa ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú.	So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets with broken pieces from the five barley loaves, which were left over by those who had eaten.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yi ka' ba yi ká ce ená Yú' Nyúè yi m geèe Dávïìd aè too ye ená Tataê? E m laèa enáê,	"He said to them, ""How then does David in the Spirit call him Lord, saying,"
Jisoès aè ghashïì ye aè rkoo, a naa mbekïì, e natïì a táá.	But Jesus took him by the hand, and raised him up; and he arose.
Jisos Kraâis aè m kwe mbe kïìntaa wa'a, a so byú' bbebep wááwá ce vi túr ñger, a duñshi neè beèe rara se ená e túr ñger a caa byú' ca.	having stripped the principalities and the powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it.
Beèe ce a m ce duè kuèntombïì ker ba beèe ce a m ce vúè embe yeâ njïì a ce yoèp mbekïì enáê, “Rluèñ li vúè! Nyúè ghoni ñwáè ce e vúè aè rlii Tataê.	"Those who went in front, and those who followed, cried out, ""Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!"
Máè suñ woweèe blaèa ce wáè m fa neè máè. Woweèe a byemi blaèa ca, a riñ foñ neè mini-ñwáè ená máè loè ba ese wáè. Woweèe a byemi ená wáè tuu máè njep ñgoèñ na.	for the words which you have given me I have given to them, and they received them, and knew for sure that I came forth from you, and they have believed that you sent me.
Woweèe a lor Pol a du aègho mbe rcuteè ce a m ce cute mbe rtuâu AÈropagoès, a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr ce koèñ aè rrïìñ njáèá ryá'nïû rfi ce aè ce yá'ni na.	"They took hold of him, and brought him to the Areopagus, saying, ""May we know what this new teaching is, which is spoken by you?"
Ŋkʉʉ yàp à dù rjɛ̀r.	Their chief has travelled.
Beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú caè wááwá a ma' ye, a cañse.	They all left him, and fled.
M be kuè ce jáèr ce duè ya yu ntïìni na, ba aèyaèñseè, ker ba aèyaèñseè caè njobeè' aède' ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè kwe aè dïì' mo' jáá caa efa aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm ka'.	Nevertheless I must go on my way today and tomorrow and the next day, for it can't be that a prophet perish outside of Jerusalem.'
M ce loo máná Tata Nyúè koosimnse neè ndap OÈnisiforoès wááwá, njobeè' a ñwáè ce e m maè'shi máè ka', a ke' koosi rïìtu njobeè' máè m ba mbe shañ ka'. E m baè' aè to' Rum, a lor nfeè' a roo máè a yá. E m yá máè wa'a a fa má ñger seê.	May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain, but when he was in Rome, he sought me diligently, and found me
Yi ba ená ñwáè ce e ka' riñ yuu boèñboñ ce aède' e geêe, ke' gee yuu anaè ka' baná ñgaèñ aè geèe yuu bebep.	To him therefore who knows to do good, and doesn't do it, to him it is sin.
M ce loo neè Nyúè ce e túr bkuè' seê, ená e fa weèe yi yú' tá yi bo geèe tá wee mntee vi ba btatap,	that he would grant you, according to the riches of his glory, that you may be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inward man;
Beèe anaè yu beèe ce a láè wap mnyor brara, a ke' bepsi wap mnyor a bbyeèñge weèe ka'. Woweèe a yu beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Muu Njeèe aè bdïì' wááwá ce muu njeèe ka' ce duè. Beèe ca yu beèe ce a yuu woweèe neè bláá, a fúr woweèe efa múè beèe, woweèe a ba beèe Nyúè, a ker a ba beèe Muu Njeèe foñ.	These are those who were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were redeemed by Jesus from among men, the first fruits to God and to the Lamb.
AÈ m ku ba yer dïì' ená weèr aè m ba laèa ená weèe nási weèr njobeè' weèr yu ñgaâa ntuu neè Jisos Kraêis. Weèr aè ka' ba a weâe mú, a ba ba aèmboè ma muu ce e ke gá' neè boo vi naè.	But we were gentle among you, like a nursing mother cherishes her own children.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè yi yu seè'ni na, m ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe fa geèe yuu mo' neè beèe ca ka'. Láè neè woweèe nyañ njobeè' yuu ce woweèe a ce kwaè'shi aè rgeèe na, yi ka' lo ba ese ñwáè baná yi be geèeti ka'.	Now I tell you, withdraw from these men, and leave them alone. For if this counsel or this work is of men, it will be overthrown.
Dávïìd ye ye aè m laèa foñ wa'a, ená Nyúè aè ka' lor ñwáè aèmboè ñwáâ nyáánïì ke' ba njobeè' rfaè' ce ñgaèñ aè geèe ka', baná ñgaèñ yu ñwáè rboâñtu seê.	Even as David also pronounces blessing on the man to whom God counts righteousness apart from works,
À be yuu toʼ a?	Will you be able to buy?
Kuè ce du neè ye yu ba aèmbuèu Tata Jisos Kraâis ce e geèe seèe aè luêñ, tá e bo túr ntee boèñboñ neè weèe, tá e bo ghoni weèe goèr, tá weèe riñ yïì buu boèñboñ. Tá beèe a ku'si ye seè'ni na ker ba aè nfeè' wááwá. Yi yu wa'a.	But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him be the glory both now and forever. Amen.
Mgbaŋ mmisèe mi yû?	Where is our salt?
Njáèá rmoèoshïì ce li ka' vú neè weèe ku ba njáèá rmoèoshïì ce li vúè neè beèe mo' foñ. Nyúè ce e yu mini be maè'shi tá li vú caèa ye ñger ka'. Rmoèoshïì li ka' vú neè weèe baná e be fa weèe ñger tá weèe táá tatap, so rmoèoshïì anaè.	No temptation has taken you except what is common to man. God is faithful, who will not allow you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation also make the way of escape, that you may be able to endure it.
a laa enáê, “Wáè ka' gú'shi neè máè baná m be fa buu ca wááwá neè wáè.”	"He said to him, ""I will give you all of these things, if you will fall down and worship me."""
aè nfeè' ce viseèe mntee vi ce sa' seèe. Yi yu wa'a njobeè' Nyúè caèa viseèe mntee, a yi buu bsïìp.	because if our heart condemns us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
E m yá bkeñ bbaa aèwaâa túè anaè. Ñgaâa ñkoo nca a m tár bkeñ anaè a du aè rsuè'si map mraa.	He saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen had gone out of them, and were washing their nets.
Beèe anaè aè m byemi ka'. Yi ku ba aèmboè AÈsayaè aè m ker sañ naè. E m sañ enáê,	For this cause they couldn't believe, for Isaiah said again,
E ka' laèa wa'a, a karsi nyor a yá Jisoès aèmboè e táá, a ke' riñ ená a Jisoès ka'.	When she had said this, she turned around and saw Jesus standing, and didn't know that it was Jesus.
Muu Njeèe ca aè ker naa nlaèadoñ mo', máè yá myoèñ beèe ce a m yúshi njo' blaâa Nyúè ce woweèe a m ce feè'shi. Myoèñ anaè mi m ba njeptii dïì' ce a ke tañshi tañshïì neè nyaèa, sáá mbo.	When he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed for the Word of God, and for the testimony of the Lamb which they had.
Baná weèe lor buu bïìr ce Nyúè aè fa neè weèe naè, tami nyor aègho, tá Sataèn e vúè naè, weèe bo maè' bïìr boèñboñ, gweè ka'. Bïìr ca ka' mïî, tá weèe bo kuè táá tatap.	Therefore, put on the whole armor of God, that you may be able to withstand in the evil day, and, having done all, to stand.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “M ka' koñ ená e ku cu nteèe caar tá m ke kúti, yo enjo ba ká? Vúè yo ba fa máâ mbuèu.”	"Jesus said to him, ""If I desire that he stay until I come, what is that to you? You follow me."""
Moè' aè laa yi enáê, ‘Máè yuu naâ' nfaè' mnsuu yi rúêú, a ce duè aègho seè'ni na aè rmoèoshi ená yi be faè' boèñboñ lá. Duè laa neè ye ená ntee yi fa yañ lá ye ka'.’	"Another said, 'I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I must go try them out. Please have me excused.'
Luke	Luêk	14	20	Moè' aè ker laa yi enáê, ‘Máè loèr ñgwa, baná aède' m vú ka'.’	Another said, 'I have married a wife, and therefore I can't come.'"
E m laèa enáê, “Tataê, beèe ca a yúshi yo ñgaâa ntuu, a kááshi wo bdïû' ntoèo mfa, aè ku báti máè. Woweèe a ce roèo aè ryú máè.”	Lord, they have killed your prophets, they have broken down your altars; and I am left alone, and they seek my life.
Máè m loo neè Tata nfeè' taar máná e fúr máè yuu anaè enje nyoèr.	Concerning this thing, I begged the Lord three times that it might depart from me.
Ye ñgeèe anaè yi ce wápsi máè seê. Yi ce yááti aèmboè la rfaè' ce máè m geèe a weâe mú naè li bú aè cicïì wa'a.	I am afraid for you, that I might have wasted my labor for you.
M ce suñ wáâ Pitaè ená aè yu ryáá. M be baè'ri yaè cor mbenduè ryáá anaè ce aède' ka' rkwe áè, li gee yuu mo' aègho ka'.	I also tell you that you are Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.
Woowèe a ce kèŋni njobèʼ a toshi woowèe à bzhɛ̀ɛ.	They are denying responsibility because they have been suspected of stealing.
Buu ca vi ka' mïì wáá, Jus a ce ye yap ñkaè' mo'. Jisoès aè du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	After these things, there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
AÈ m ba aè rla' Daèmaskoès ñwáâ ñgoèr ce e m ce faè' njeptii AÈrátaè aè laa bsoogáè a sir rla' Daèmaskoès tá a bo koo máè.	In Damascus the governor under King Aretas guarded the city of the Damascenes desiring to arrest me.
Wɛ̀ ku tʉki mbàŋ tʉki a?	Have you moved only one step in the game?
Taèr Mañgoèñ, nyúè aè ka' kuèu ñgoèñ, máè yá aèmboè rraa li raa embe buèu, mbe máâ nduè, ker ba aè nduè beèe ce weèr woweèe aè m ce duè. Rraa anaè li m raa a caa nyúè.	at noon, O king, I saw on the way a light from the sky, brighter than the sun, shining around me and those who traveled with me.
Njɛ̀ɛbyàa [ndʒɛ̀ː-bjàː] n 1a.	one of the clans of Mbum tribe; Yaa clan.
E du a su'si vi mnfur neè mruè', a fa mcáèp mbo, a kur. A ka' kur, a ko'si ye mbe yïì jaèaki', a lor a du aègho mbe hoètáêl, a ke'ni ye.	came to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring on oil and wine. He set him on his own animal, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè ce e ka' ma'shi li rla' káè ñgwa yïì áè, káè bfúr vi áè, káè yïì ma ba yïì ta áè, káè boo vi áè, njobeè' kúú Nyúè,	"He said to them, ""Most certainly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or wife, or brothers, or parents, or children, for the Kingdom of God's sake,"
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená byee ce a m fa neè wee bta naè, aè m fa Musïìs ka'. Yaè Ta a ñwáè ce e ce fa weèe byee ce mini ce vi suèu embe buèu.	"Jesus therefore said to them, ""Most certainly, I tell you, it wasn't Moses who gave you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven."
A ker sañ foñ enáê, ‘Woweèe a be yaè wáè mbe mmboè faè dïì' aè túú yo kuèu aè luèr ka'.’ ”	"and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest perhaps you dash your foot against a stone.'"""
E beesïì enáê, “Ñwáè ce yi bo yi be tarte a ya njep kañ, yu ñwáè ce e be fyeèni máè.	"He answered, ""He who dipped his hand with me in the dish, the same will betray me."
Muu wàa, vʉ̀ mbena tɛ m tuu wɛ̀.	My son, come here and let me sent you.
Ká' ese aè nfeè' ce Nyúè aè m geèe ñgoèñ, ñwáè aè m be yu' ená ñwáè moè' aè geèe ñwáè ce a m bi ye e ku ba nfeèp e ce yá buu ka'.	Since the world began it has never been heard of that anyone opened the eyes of someone born blind.
M ku ce geèe ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Beèe ce a m be suñ woweèe yuu mo' aèmboè ye ka' a be yá. Beèe ce a m be yu' yuu mo' aèmboè ye ka' a be rïìñ.”	"But, as it is written, ""They will see, to whom no news of him came. They who haven't heard will understand."""
Weèe ñwáè moè' fa ba neè rkaa ka'. Rkaa ce aède' aè túr weèe ñwáè li yu ená aè koèñ ñgaèñ. Ñwáè aè ka' koñ beèe, baná e láè mncir wááwá.	Owe no one anything, except to love one another; for he who loves his neighbor has fulfilled the law.
Woowèe a ce boo nshe.	They are moulding mud bricks.
Mɛ̀ mòoshi enɛ m doo mutù, a moo làr.	I attempted to drive a motor, and could not do it.
Beèe Nyúè wááwá a caè'ni weèe.	All the saints greet you.
AÈ m ba aè mnoèñ ca ce ñgoo ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès aè m ce kuè', beèe ce a m ce laèa li Greâk a m laèañger a kuu beèe ce a m ce laèa li Hibruè njobeè' a m ce gaèpshi buu neè beèe aè mnoèñ wááwá, a ce fa byepkúú wap ka'.	Now in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplying, a complaint arose from the Hellenists against the Hebrews, because their widows were neglected in the daily service.
Tami nyor, táá tatap aè lo rbyemïì. Fa wáp yuu ka', ba neè ñger-ñwáè.	Watch! Stand firm in the faith! Be courageous! Be strong!
Awá Jisoès aè laa neè beèe ce ncoèp-baa-aè-rrúèú enáê, “Yi yu yi ká aèmboè weèe, weèe be maè'shi máè duèse foñ a?”	"Jesus said therefore to the twelve, ""You don't also want to go away, do you?"""
Muu ca tùr bfee sê.	This child is very wise.
Yuu ce m ce byemi a wáâ bsii yi yu ená, m ce loo Nyúè weêr bta aè nduunjïì mo' ce Jus a laèa yap ená a nduunjïû yáánïì ka'. Máè byemi buu wááwá ce a sañ mbe ñwaâ' mncir ba mñwaâ' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè.	But this I confess to you, that after the Way, which they call a sect, so I serve the God of our fathers, believing all things which are according to the law, and which are written in the prophets;
Beèe Farïìsi a ka' yá wa'a, a ká' a ce laèa a waâp mú enáê, “AÈde' seèe gee yuu mo' ka'. Yá aèmboè beèe wááwá a kuñ nyor a du a yeâ mbuèu.”	"The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, ""See how you accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him."""
Mboè yi m ba yáánïì ená Kraâis anaè yá ñgá' ca, tá a ka' kuè'si ye a?”	"Didn't the Christ have to suffer these things and to enter into his glory?"""
Hároèd aè ka' yu' wa'a, a laa enáê, “Joân ce máè m tee ye tu naè, aè fúú efa rkwe.”	"But Herod, when he heard this, said, ""This is John, whom I beheaded. He has risen from the dead."""
Weèe ce loèr mnoèñ mo', ba mñwáá mo', ba nfeè' moè', ba bfeè' mo' ená vi yu jáá njoká?	You observe days, months, seasons, and years.
E niñ mbe moè' ce aè m ba yïì Saimúèn, a laa neè ye ená e doo du aègho nje múè roè múcaèr. E cu mbo a ce yá'ni ku' beèe ce a m táá nje waâa túè naè.	He entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, and asked him to put out a little from the land. He sat down and taught the multitudes from the boat.
Wɛ̀r à mʉ du wɛɛ mɛ̀ tʉʉ waaŋga.	We went on a hunt and I shot a rabbit.
A sañ enáê, “Yi ka' ba tatap neè beèe ce a yu yáánïì aè rluèñ efa mnsa', beèe ce a ce wáp Nyúè ka', a ce geèe buu bbebep a lo ba yap ba fá?”	If it is hard for the righteous to be saved, what will happen to the ungodly and the sinner?
E m yú Jáms ce e m ba nfúr Joân neè kaèafaè'.	He killed James, the brother of John, with the sword.
Seèe ka' koñ Nyúè ker ce geèe buu ce e ce laèa, seèe yi ená seèe koèñ boo vi.	By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
Ñwáè aè ka' tá jaè' yïì beèe ka', lañlañ beèe embe yeâ ndaèp, baná ñgaèñ aè kani buu ce e byemïì, a bep a caa ñwáè ce e byemi ka'.	But if anyone doesn't provide for his own, and especially his own household, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an unbeliever.
a ce saèr buu Nyúè neè woweèe, a ce duèñshi neè woweèe ená yi m ba ená Kraâis anaè aè m túr aè ryá ñgá', kwe, fúú efa rkwe. E m laèa enáê, “Jisoès ce m ce suñ weèe aèmboè ye na, yu Kraâis anaè.”	"explaining and demonstrating that the Christ had to suffer and rise again from the dead, and saying, ""This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ."""
A m beèe dïì' anaè neè bcáè', a ba'ri taèp neè bcáè' foñ mbe múè mo. A m baè'ri taèp anaè wa'a, yi ba brum bbaa. A m too yïì entombïì enáê, “Dïû' rara.” Buu ce a m láè mbe rum anaè aè m ba laêm, ba tábuèr ba bráâd yïû Nyúè.	For a tabernacle was prepared. In the first part were the lampstand, the table, and the show bread; which is called the Holy Place.
aèmboè njeñwáè ca aè fa máè ñgá' goèr na, m be sa' mi mnsa', teni mi yáánïì, buwa'laèr e ku ce vúè, tá m misi sáè.’ ”	"yet because this widow bothers me, I will defend her, or else she will wear me out by her continual coming.'"""
suñ ená Jisos Kraâis yu Taèr, tá bkuè'sïì vi ba neè Nyúè Taèr.	and that every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Nyúè aè laèa mbe yeâ Ñwaè' enáê, “Nfeè' ce máè m ba aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ neè wáè aè m gháá, máè fa wa btuè' neè wáè. Noèñ ce máè m ba aè rjaè' wáè tá aè bo luèñ, yi m gháá, máè ja' wáè.” Rïìñ neè ená nfeè' ce aède' Nyúè gee yuu boèñboñ neè seèe, yu ba seè'ni na. Nfeè' ce aède' Nyúè gee beèe a luêñ, yu seè'ni na.	"for he says, ""At an acceptable time I listened to you, in a day of salvation I helped you."" Behold, now is the acceptable time. Behold, now is the day of salvation."
Jisoès aè laa enáê, “Beèe mo' beèe a mmbaa a m túr rkaa a ñwáè moè' ce e m foèosi woweèe mbaèa. Moè' aè m túr rkaa a ye aè bbaèa mbaèa taê, moè' aè túr li a ye aè nto'nïì baèa mbaèa.	"A certain lender had two debtors. The one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
Luke	Luêk	7	42	Moè' efa woweèe aè m túr mbaèa ce aède' e m ba la' rkaa anaè aègho ka', yi ka' ba wa'a, ñwáè anaè aè ma'shïì mbaèa anaè neè woweèe. Baná ñwáè efa beèe a mmbaa ca ce e be koèñ ñwáè mbaèa anaè goèr yu ba nda?”	When they couldn't pay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore will love him most?"
Bbyeèñge mo' ce e m geèe woweèe a luñ efa byú' bbebep, ba byañ, a m duè foñ a woweèe. Moè' efa woweèe aè m ba Máèári ce a m ce too ená Maèkdaèleên, ce byú' bbebep vi m fúú enjep ye vi saèamba naè,	and certain women who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out;
Bfeè' vi ka' caèa ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú, máè ker du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm weèr Baènabaès. Máè m loèr Taitoès, weèr woweèe aè duê.	Then after a period of fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, taking Titus also with me.
Weèe ka' ce geèe ka' njáèá ká, weèe fa ce rúèúrú ka',	Do all things without murmurings and disputes,
M ̀ ce vʉ̀ efa mŋkʉ̀ʉ.	I am coming from the farm.
Ka' yi yu wa'a, rfa ce Nyúè aè m fa njo' ñwáè ce e m bii ka' vúè anaè li yu jáá efa yuu bebep ce Adaèm aè m geèe. Beèe magoèr a m kweñger njo' yuu bebep ce ñwáè moè'sir ce yu Adaèm aè m geèe. AÈ ka' ba njobeè' rboâñntee ñwáè moè'sir foñ ce yu Jisos Kraêis, beèe magoèr se a konïì rboâñntee Nyúè ce yu rfa ce e fa aè cicïì.	But the free gift isn't like the trespass. For if by the trespass of the one the many died, much more did the grace of God, and the gift by the grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abound to the many.
Kúr ñkuânyaèm mo' goèr se yi m ba aèfo, a ce yeñger aèwaâa rtuèu.	Now on the mountainside there was a great herd of pigs feeding.
Bcïìndap Nyúè wowo a m sïìr kaèbaèraè', ba beâe bgoèrgoèr, ba buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe naèè, a kaari a tarte. A ka' sïìr, a gú'shi neè Nyúè,	All the angels were standing around the throne, the elders, and the four living creatures; and they fell on their faces before his throne, and worshiped God,
Loèr neè ba ndeèe Tata Jisos Kraêis. Fa fa neè njïì neè buu bebep ce ñwáè e ke koèñ aè rgeèe naè ka'.	But put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, for its lusts.
Beèe wááwá ce Yú' Nyúè yi ce duèñshi woweèe nduunjïì, a yu boo Nyúè.	For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are children of God.
Máè ka' keè' a yá aèmboè muu njeèe aè naèa nlaèadoñ yïì entoèmbïì efa múè vïû saèambaê. E ka' naèa, máè yu' aèmboè moè' efa buu bteèe ce vi m ba kyeèe naè aè laèa, njeèndoñ aè rúúñgeèr aèmboè mbeèñ wa'a, a laa enáê, “Vúè!”	"I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals, and I heard one of the four living creatures saying, as with a voice of thunder, ""Come and see!"""
Beèe Farïìsi foñ a ker bipshi neè ye ená e ba gee eká a ka' ce yá buu lá. E suñ woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè anaè aè ba yo' máè nshe nje mmïìr, máè du a su'si mmir, a ká' a ce yá buu.”	"Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received his sight. He said to them, ""He put mud on my eyes, I washed, and I see."""
Lɛ̀ bcɛ̀ʼ mà mʉ̀ ndap.	Put the clothes in the room.
Ñgaèa aè ka' kuèu, nfeè' ce a be geèe muu búè aè gháá. E ka' gháá, a fa rlii muu ená Jisoès. Rlii ca aè m ku ba rlii ce ncïìndap Nyúè aè m fa muu wáá tá yïì ma ka' keè koo rbúè.	When eight days were fulfilled for the circumcision of the child, his name was called Jesus, which was given by the angel before he was conceived in the womb.
Beèe mo' a maè' buu ca a da' nduunjïì a du ba aèmbuèu bde' bcicïì.	from which things some, having missed the mark, have turned aside to vain talking;
E m laèa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe aè ka' ce geèe rloo, weèe laa weenáê, ‘Taèr, tá lo rlii li ba rrara, tá yo kúú yi ká'.	"He said to them, ""When you pray, say, 'Our Father in heaven, may your name be kept holy. May your Kingdom come. May your will be done on Earth, as it is in heaven."
Woweèe a ka' caèa ñgoâñ Pïìsidïìyaè, a ba' aè ñgoâñ Paèmfilïìyaè,	They passed through Pisidia, and came to Pamphylia.
a duè fa yeâ laè', a yá'ni beâe aèfo mbe yaèp ndap rloo, woweèe a bááñgeèr seê, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ca aè geèe bfee ca ba efá, a koni ñger aè rgeèe buu bghagha' ca ba efá?	"Coming into his own country, he taught them in their synagogue, so that they were astonished, and said, ""Where did this man get this wisdom, and these mighty works?"
Loèr yo dïì' yá ñgá' aèmboè ñwáè soogáâ mboèñmboñ neè Jisos Kraêis.	You therefore must endure hardship, as a good soldier of Christ Jesus.
Mɛ̀ bʉʼ rkìŋ anà ànjii.	I have broken that pot unexpectedly.
Nyúè aè geèe seèe aè riñ buu ca njïì enjep yi Yú'. Yú' Nyúè yi rïìñ buu wááwá, a riñ ka' buu Nyúè ce vi yu aè bsúèti.	But to us, God revealed them through the Spirit. For the Spirit searches all things, yes, the deep things of God.
Mruè' ñkaè' ca mi ka' mïì, ma yïì Jisoès aè laa neè Jisoès enáê, “A no mruè' mi sáê.”	"When the wine ran out, Jesus' mother said to him, ""They have no wine."""
Ñwáâ aè ñgoâñ Saèmarïìyaè ce e m ce duè aè mbeèp anaè foñ aè vú a búú a yeâ nduè, a ka' yá aèmboè e noèñ, nse yi koo ye.	But a certain Samaritan, as he traveled, came where he was. When he saw him, he was moved with compassion,
Nyúè be loèr yi ñger fúr seèe aègho efa rkwe aèmboè e m fúr Tata Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe naè.	Now God raised up the Lord, and will also raise us up by his power.
Mmbañruè wááwá ce a m ye, a m ba ncúèkïì kyeèe, ka' lor bbyeèñge ba bghaèrbeèe.	Those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children.
Zhìsò mbʉ à mʉ bʉ.	Our goat got missing.
Beèe mo' efa weâr mú yu beâe Pátïìyaè ba Mádïìyaè, beâe Álaèm ba Máèsoèpoètámïìyaè, beâe Judaè ba Kaèpaèdosïìyaè, beâe Pontuès ba Ásïìyaè.	Parthians, Medes, Elamites, and people from Mesopotamia, Judea, Cappadocia, Pontus, Asia,
Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “Kupse neè, ma' yeè buu bbebep tá a bo baèptir weèe wááwá aè rlii Jisos Kraêis, tá Nyúè foosi weèe yeè buu bbebep, tá weèe koni Yú' Rara ce yu rfa ese Nyúè.	"Peter said to them, ""Repent, and be baptized, every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of sins, and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit."
Njeñwáè anaè aè m tár ntúñ mdip a kúti aè laè' a laa neè beèe enáê,	So the woman left her water pot, and went away into the city, and said to the people,
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' Nyúè aè geèe wa'a, máâ Poêl, m ce loo neè weèe. M yu ñwáè shañ njobeè' m yu ñwáè rfaè' neè Jisos Kraêis, a ce faè' neè weèe ce weèe yu beèe enje jáá.	For this cause I, Paul, am the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,
Kúr ñkuânyaèm mo' goèr se yi m ba aèfo a ce yeñger mbe rtuèu. Byú' mnyúâmkaè' ca vi bu' mmbo neè Jisoès ená e ma'shi tá a niñ ba njep ñkuânyaèm anaè. Jisoès aè ma'shïì.	Now there was there a herd of many pigs feeding on the mountain, and they begged him that he would allow them to enter into those. He allowed them.
Musïìs aè m sañ aèmboè aède' ñwáè ba yáánïì njo' mncir, a laa enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' lá mncir wááwá baná ñgaèñ be cu njo' mncir anaè.”	"For Moses writes about the righteousness of the law, ""The one who does them will live by them."""
Ñgaâa ntuu Nyúè wááwá, ká' embe nfeè' yïì Saâmwáèl du ba' mbe nfeè' yïì ñgaâa ntuu wááwá ce a m ba mbenjïì Saâmwáèl a m laèa aèmboè mnoèñ ca.	Yes, and all the prophets from Samuel and those who followed after, as many as have spoken, they also told of these days.
Mɛ̀ koni ntaʼ ministà.	I have got the position of minister.
Beèe moè' ce a yu bwer, a kani yuu mini, a ce geèe ba buu bbebep naè, a be yá ñgá' rshentee ba bepntee Nyúè.	but to those who are self-seeking, and don't obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness, will be wrath and indignation,
Geewa'a, beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a m kani yuu ce Nyúè aè m koèñ aè rgeèe neè woweèe, a kani foñ ená Joân fa baèptir woweèe ka'.	But the Pharisees and the lawyers rejected the counsel of God, not being baptized by him themselves.
Ñwáè ce e m koo ncúèkïì ta naè aè loèr mbaèa anaè a ku ká' a ce geèe ntaa aègho, a ye sá' aè ncúèkïì taê.	Immediately he who received the five talents went and traded with them, and made another five talents.
Cena yi ka' mïì, máè ker yá yuu báèá mo' mbe buèu. AÈ m ba yuu laèa ka'. Máè m yá bcïìndap Nyúè saèambaê. Woweèe a m vúè neè mñgá' saèambaê. Mñgá' saèamba ca aè m ba mñgá' ce elúèsimbuèu. Nyúè be mïìsi li rshentee ba neè mñgá' ca.	I saw another great and marvelous sign in the sky: seven angels having the seven last plagues, for in them God's wrath is finished.
E natïì a ce duè, a ka' ce duè, a yá ñwáâ aè to' IÌtopïìyaè. AÈ m ba ñwáè ce a m soèñ, ce e m ce faè' njeptii Mayaâa Kandáès ce e m ce sa' to' IÌtopïìyaè. Buu Mayaâa wááwá aè m ba mba yeâ mmboè. E m duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm aè rgeèe rloo neè Nyúè,	He arose and went; and behold, there was a man of Ethiopia, a eunuch of great authority under Candace, queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.
Máè m vúè aè rla' Koreèn ka' faè dïì' m bo loè geèe tá nyor bep weèe ka'. M ce ká' Nyúè ená e táá yaè njïìnsa' ená yuu ce m ce laèa na yi yu mini.	But I call God for a witness to my soul, that I didn't come to Corinth to spare you.
Kuâu jár neè ba njep nduunjïì ce yi yu kuèyáá, tá kuèu ce weèe ce nyáèá ntáèñ aègho naè yi bo tap tap, ke' yañ goèr ka'.	and make straight paths for your feet, so that which is lame may not be dislocated, but rather be healed.
“Seèe ku'si Tata ce e yu Nyúè beèe Isráèl. E m vúè a yá yïì beèe, a tee woweèe efa ñgá'.	"Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, for he has visited and worked redemption for his people;
Luke	Luêk	1	69	E fa seèe ñwáâ ñgoèr ce e be geèe tá beèe a luêñ, aè ba ñwáè embe ndúè' Dávïìd ce e yu yïì ñwáè rfaè'.	and has raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David
Luke	Luêk	1	70	E m laèa eluâuñgoèñ ekuè cuèu yi ñgaâa ncep ntuu ce a m ba brara ená,	(as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets who have been from of old),
Luke	Luêk	1	71	e be jaè', fúr seèe embaè mmbo beèe ce a baèa seèe,	salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us;
Luke	Luêk	1	72	aè rduèñshi yïì ñkoosimnse neè viseèe btarkú, keèr kuushi yi leâ' rara	to show mercy towards our fathers, to remember his holy covenant,
Luke	Luêk	1	73	ce e m ye a Abraèham ce e yu yïìseèe tarkú.	the oath which he spoke to Abraham, our father,
Luke	Luêk	1	74	E m ye leè' ená e be fúr seèe embaè mmbo yiseèe ñgaâa bbaèa, tá seèe bo faè' neè ye, ce wáp yuu mo' ka',	to grant to us that we, being delivered out of the hand of our enemies, should serve him without fear,
Luke	Luêk	1	75	ba brara, keèr ba byáánïì a yeâ bsii, caar keè caèa kweñger.	In holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
Luke	Luêk	1	76	AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè wáè, muu waè, a be keè too wáè ená ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè embe buèu, njobeè' aè be duè entombïì neè Tataê, kupshi nduunjïì neè ye.	And you, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High, for you will go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways,
Luke	Luêk	1	77	AÈ be geèe tá yïì beèe a riñ ená Nyúè be foèosi yaèp buu bbebep, geèe tá woweèe a luêñ.	to give knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins,
Luke	Luêk	1	78	Yïìseèe Nyúè yu ñwáè ñkoosimnse, a boñ ñgeèe foñ. E be geèe tá nyúè bap embe buèu sañ mbe seâe nduè.	because of the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dawn from on high will visit us,
Luke	Luêk	1	79	E be sañ mbenduè beèe ce a cu aè túè'nji, njeptii rleèñshi rkwe naè, tá e bo duèñshi seèe nduunjïì cumúnyañ.”	to shine on those who sit in darkness and the shadow of death; to guide our feet into the way of peace."
Fa nya' neè mnde' neè ñwáè moè' ka', njobeè' weèe aè maè' ye ñgeâe rúèú ce weèe aè m ce geèe naè,	Don't lie to one another, seeing that you have put off the old man with his doings,
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ entoèmbïì embe múè ñgaèa, weèr a vú aèbee aè rye byee Nyúè. Pol aè fe'shïì blaâa Nyúè, a fe'shi caar a ba' neè ntee tú' njobeè' e m rïìñ ená túè' be raa tá e duê.	On the first day of the week, when the disciples were gathered together to break bread, Paul talked with them, intending to depart on the next day, and continued his speech until midnight.
Kúúsi neè rboèñ ce weèr aè m ce geèe neè weèe naè, mú' wee mntee lá btoo foñ. M ce laèa neè weèe aèmboè boo wa.	Now in return, I speak as to my children, you also be open wide.
Mdip ca mi ruu kaʼ, mi yu mbʉ̀rʉŋ.	This container of water is not full, it is only partway full.
Joân aè m vúè a yá weèe a ce duèñshi weèe nduunjïû yáánïì, weèe aè byemïì yuu ce e m ce laèa ka', ñgaâa ñkuèu mbaâa baèraè' ba bkwaèraè, a byemïì yap yu. Weèe aè ka' yá wa'a, a ke' kupse, byemi ka'.	For John came to you in the way of righteousness, and you didn't believe him, but the tax collectors and the prostitutes believed him. When you saw it, you didn't even repent afterward, that you might believe him.
Rkoèñnïì anaè li yu ba ená seèe aè m koèñ Nyúè ka', yu ba ená e m koèñ seèe, a tuu muu yïì ená e ba yuu geèe tañshïì aètu yïìseèe buu bbebep.	In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son as the atoning sacrifice for our sins.
“Ndoèo aè co' weèe, beèe Farïìsïî, njobeè' wee ke fa ñgúè' moè'sir efa rúêú, efa mú buu jáá jáèá jáá ce a ke láè njep njaèp, a ma' ñgeâe mini, a koñ Nyúè ka'. Weèe aè ba geèe buu ca keèr geèe mmo' ca foñ.	But woe to you Pharisees! For you tithe mint and rue and every herb, but you bypass justice and the love of God. You ought to have done these, and not to have left the other undone.
M ce koèñ máná weèe riñ aèmboè m ce gheèter neè weèe, ker ba beâe aè rla' Laèodisïìyaè ker ba beèe wááwá ce weèr woweèe aè m be tarte ka'.	For I desire to have you know how greatly I struggle for you, and for those at Laodicea, and for as many as have not seen my face in the flesh;
Àfyoŋ ce còo embe bùu.	The aeroplane is steaming in the air.
Baná ñgúè beèe aè m ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú ká' embe nfeè' yïì Abraèhaêm, du ba' mbe nfeè' yïì Dávïìd, a ker ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú ká' embe nfeè' yïì Dávïìd du ba' mbe nfeè' a m ce koo beèe ce duè aègho aè to' Babiloèn naè, a ba ncoèp-kyeèe-aè-rrúèú ká' embe nfeè' ce a m duè neè beèe aè to' Babiloèn du ba' mbe nfeè' yïì Kraâis anaè.	So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations; from David to the exile to Babylon fourteen generations; and from the carrying away to Babylon to the Christ, fourteen generations.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a ká' ese noèñ anaè, a ce seèesi aèmboè a be geèe ka' yú ye.	So from that day forward they took counsel that they might put him to death.
E ka' fúr wa'a, nshe aè ja' njeñwáè ca, a sa'ti, a nyoñ rdip ce nyaèa ca aè m fúr ekuè cuèu naè wááwá.	The earth helped the woman, and the earth opened its mouth and swallowed up the river which the dragon spewed out of his mouth.
Woweèe a ka' yá ye, a gú'shi neè ye, beèe mo' a tarnïì yap tarni.	When they saw him, they bowed down to him, but some doubted.
E ka' laèa wa'a, a koo woweèe nje nyoèr, a la' mmbo mbe waâp nduè, a ghoni woweèe.	He took them in his arms, and blessed them, laying his hands on them.
Woweèe a tuu ñgaâa yá'ni yaèp buu, ker ba beèe mo' efa múè beèe vi Hároèd ená woweèe a du laa enáê, “Ñwáè ryá'nïì, weèr rïìñ werná aè yu ñwáè mini, a ce yá'ni beèe mnduunjïì Nyúè neè mini-ñwáè. Wá ke loèr ñwáè moè' jáá ka'.	"They sent their disciples to him, along with the Herodians, saying, ""Teacher, we know that you are honest, and teach the way of God in truth, no matter who you teach, for you aren't partial to anyone."
Ka' cu mmbañruè mo' a baa a ce de' a Jisoès. Mmbañruè ca aè m ba Musïìs ba AÈlajaè.	Behold, two men were talking with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
M mbe dù ntaa yuu wɛ̀ kwâa mbàa.	I will go to the market and buy corn for you, understood?
Mɛ̀ dù ŋkar, ntar à bûu.	I went visiting, and there was no entertainment.
Ñwáè anaè aè m ce cu ba aè dïì' anaè. Yi ke' ba aètáèr aè rkur ye, ka' neè bkwaèñ ka'.	He lived in the tombs. Nobody could bind him any more, not even with chains,
Beâe bgoèrgoèr efa múè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì, ba bleebeèe a ka' toshi ye aè buu moè', e beesïì yuu ka'.	When he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Ŋkòʼ e Kùyà zhi ke ŋaŋ sê.	The juju from Kuya is very rough.
Baná aè rgeèe tá weèe bo rïìñ weená Muu Ñwáè túr ñger njep ñgoèñ na aè rfoèosi beèe efa yaèp buu bbebep.” E laa neè ñwáè yañ ca enáê, “M ce laèa neè wáè ená aè nati mbekïì, lor yo keèñ du aè laè'.”	"But that you may know that the Son of Man has authority on earth to forgive sins"" (he said to the paralyzed man), ""I tell you, arise, and take up your cot, and go to your house."""
Ñwáè ce e ka' tá ba weèr ye ka', baná ñgaèñ yu yaè ñwáè bbaèa. Ñwáè ce e ka' tá ce baashi weèr ye ka', baná ñgaèñ ce da'si da'si.	"He who is not with me is against me, and he who doesn't gather with me, scatters.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	31	Baná m ce suñ weèe máná Nyúè be foèosi beèe efa buu bbebep wááwá ce woweèe a geèe, ker ba buu bbebep ce woweèe a laèa. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè ñwáè ce e bepsi rlii Yú' Rara, aède' Nyúè foosïì ñgaèñ ka'.	Therefore I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven men.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	32	A be foèosi ñwáè ce e ka' laa yuu bebep kuu Muu Ñwáè. Ñwáè ce e ka' laa yuu bebep kuu ba Yú' Rara baná a be foèosi ñgaèñ ka', ka' aè nfeâ' seè'ni na, káè aè nfeè' ce e bii ka' ba áè.	Whoever speaks a word against the Son of Man, it will be forgiven him; but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in this age, nor in that which is to come.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	12	33	“Weèe aè ba rïìñ ená mbaèñ ce yi ka' ba boèñboñ, baná ce yi yu boèñboñ. Mbaèñ ce yi ka' ba bebep, baná ce yi yu bebep foñ. A ke rïìñ ce ba neè mbaèñ ce anaè.	Either make the tree good, and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt; for the tree is known by its fruit."
E m geèe ba aèmboè a sañ mbe dïì' mo' embe Ñwaâ' Nyúè. A sañ mbo enáê, “Tataê, muu ñwáè yu ká tá aè ka' kwaè'shi aèmboè ye? E yu ká tá aè ka' jaè' ye.	"But one has somewhere testified, saying, ""What is man, that you think of him? Or the son of man, that you care for him?"
Weèr rïìñ ená Nyúè aè m suñ buu neè Musïìs. AÈ ka' ba aèmboè ñwáè ca, weèr rïìñ faèdïì' ce e ce vúè ka'.”	"We know that God has spoken to Moses. But as for this man, we don't know where he comes from."""
Nyúè a ñwáè ce e geèe seèe aè tamïì nyor aè rkupseè ca, a ker fa yú' neè seèe, aèmboè btár, yi ce duèñshi ená seèe be koni buu ce Nyúè aè kaè' seèe.	Now he who made us for this very thing is God, who also gave to us the down payment of the Spirit.
Weèe aè vúè neè beèe ca mbena ce aèmboè woweèe a yáèá buu embe mndap nyúè ka', a laa yuu mo' bebep aèmboè yïìseèe nyúè ka'.	For you have brought these men here, who are neither robbers of temples nor blasphemers of your goddess.
Weèe aè ka' ce koèñ aè rbyemïì, weèe riñ weená e yu AÈlajaè ce a m laèa ená e be keèe vúè naè.	If you are willing to receive it, this is Elijah, who is to come.
Ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè wááwá a m laèa aèmboè ye, a suñ beèe ená ñwáè ce e ka' byemi, baná Nyúè be foèosi ñgaèñ efa yïì buu bbebep a yeâ rlii.”	"All the prophets testify about him, that through his name everyone who believes in him will receive remission of sins."""
Seèe ka' suñ yïìseèe buu bbebep, baná Nyúè ce e ke láè yi nlaèa, a ker ba kuèyáá, be foèosi seèe yïìseèe buu bbebep, suè'si seèe efa buu wááwá ce vi yu yáánïì ka'.	If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous to forgive us the sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.
E mʉ du fà làʼ.	He went to the village.
Jisoès aè m loè a ce duè, a ka' baè' aètútú rla' Jáèrikuè, nfeèp moè' a cu aèwaâa nduunjïì a ce loo buu.	It happened, as he came near Jericho, a certain blind man sat by the road, begging.
Byee ce Nyúè ce fa anaè yu byee ce vi suèu embe buèu a ce fa ryoèñ ce mini neè beèe enjep ñgoèñ na.”	"For the bread of God is that which comes down out of heaven, and gives life to the world."""
À kaʼ luute ce gèe banɛ m̀ be lìp wɛ̀.	If you continue doing it therefore I will beat you.
‘Weèr ce kashi nfúènfú ce weèr aè koo aè mkuèu fa weâe laè' na, aè rduèñshi ená weèe aè geèe yuu bebep. Ka' yi yu wa'a, rïìñ neè ená kúú Nyúè yi vúè aètútú.’	Even the dust from your city that clings to us, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know this, that the Kingdom of God has come near to you.'
Moè' efa woweèe ce a m ce too li rlii ená AÈgaboès aè m naèti mbekïì, a laa aè ñger Yú' rara ená njeè be koo aè ñgoèñ wááwá. Ca yi m koni aè nfeè' ce Klaâdïìyoès aè m ce sa' beèe naè.	One of them named Agabus stood up, and indicated by the Spirit that there should be a great famine all over the world, which also happened in the days of Claudius.
Woweèe a m laèa enáê, “Seèe be geèe seeká neè beèe ca? Beèe wááwá aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a rïìñ ená woweèe a geèe yuu báèá seê. AÈde' seèe kanïì ka'.	"saying, ""What shall we do to these men? Because indeed a notable miracle has been done through them, as can be plainly seen by all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we can't deny it."
Mɛ̀ cep ntuu nè zhìi tâa.	I sent the message through his father.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ka' ce kuèu mbaâa baèraè', weèe fa koo caèa embe dïì' ce ncir yi laèa ka'.”	"He said to them, ""Collect no more than that which is appointed to you."""
Boo waê, seèe fa kuè koèñ beèe ba ekuè cuèu ka'. Seèe duñshi rkoèñnïì neè mini-ñwáè aè yuu ce seèe ce geèe.	My little children, let's not love in word only, neither with the tongue only, but in deed and truth.
Ca yu wa bláá ce vi kur leâ' Nyúè, ce vi be fúú, suèu aètu beèe magoèr, tá Nyúè bo foèosi woweèe efa buu bbebep ce woweèe a geèe.	for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many for the remission of sins.
njeñwáè ye ye ka' ma'shi nduu yïì du bguèu a mbañruèñwáè moè', baná e noèñ a mbañruèñwáè ce yu nduu yïì ka'.”	"If a woman herself divorces her husband, and marries another, she commits adultery."""
Jisoès aè beesïì enáê, “AÈde' aè túr ñger mbe máâ nduè ka', ce a m ka' tá baè fa ñger anaè neè wáè embe buèu ka'. Baná yuu bebep yi ñwáè ce e koo máè a fa mba wáâ mmboè, yi yu yi goèr a caa yo.”	"Jesus answered, ""You would have no power at all against me, unless it were given to you from above. Therefore he who delivered me to you has greater sin."""
a laa ená e fa ye ñwaè' tá e bo duè fa neè btu embe mndap mloâo aè rla' Daèmaskoès, e ka' duè yá beèe ce a ce jáèr njep nduunjïì Kraêis, káè yu mmbañruè á, káè yu bbyeèñge áè, e bo kur woweèe vúè aègho aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm tá a bo sa' woweèe.	and asked for letters from him to the synagogues of Damascus, that if he found any who were of the Way, whether men or women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
E geèe wa'a a fa seèe buu bboèñboñ ce e m kaè' ená e be fa seèe naè, tá weèe bo túr ñger aè rcañ efa gee buu bbebep enjep ñgoèñ na, ce beèe enjep ñgoèñ na a koèñ se naè. Yi ka' ba wa'a tá weèe bo geèe ba ñgeèe ce yi yu aèmboè yïû Nyúè.	by which he has granted to us his precious and exceedingly great promises; that through these you may become partakers of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption that is in the world by lust.
Loèr neè nfeè' faè dïì' weèe bá yuu ce weèe ce faè' aètu mo ka' tá weèe bo koni wee blaè' wááwá.	Watch yourselves, that we don't lose the things which we have accomplished, but that we receive a full reward.
Yi ka' ba wa'a, woweèe a ka' moo aè rcu wa' laèr, mbañruèñwáè lor ñgwa yïì, njeñwáè yá nduu yïì a ye a cu. Yi yu aèndeèe ce mbañruèñwáè ka' lor ñgwa, njeñwáè ye ye du bguèu neè ce a ku cu wa'a tá ntee njeñwáè yi ce loè mbañruèñwáè seê, tá ntee mbañruèñwáè yi ce loè njeñwáè seê.	But if they don't have self-control, let them marry. For it's better to marry than to burn.
Beèe enje jáá ba Juês, ker ba beèe ce a m ba btu neè woweèe, a kwa'shïì a byemi ená a be jar neè ñgaâa ntuu Jisoès, túúshi woweèe neè bluèr.	When some of both the Gentiles and the Jews, with their rulers, made a violent attempt to mistreat and stone them,
Ñwáè ce aède' e gapnïì seèe efa rkoèñnïì ce Kraâis koèñ seèe naè, yu nda? Yuu mo' yi yu ka', káè seèe yu aè ñgá' áè, káè buu aè tap neè seèe se áè, káè beèe a ce fa seèe ñgá' áè, káè njeè ce yañ seèe áè, káè seèe aè buu bcáè' áè, káè yu rkwe áè, káè beèe a ce yú seèe áè, aède' seèe Jisoès weèe gapnïì ka'.	Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Could oppression, or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Jisoès aè m ker nati a ce duè aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm. A ka' ce duè, a ce jár aè mla' mñgoèrñgoèr ba aè mla' mká'ká', a ce yá'ni beèe.	He went on his way through cities and villages, teaching, and traveling on to Jerusalem.
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Fa joèo máè ka' njobeè' máè be du a yá Taèr ka'. Duè, du suñ bfúr wa ená m be duè faèdïì' ce yaè Ta ce e yu yeè Taê, a ba yaè Nyúè, a ba yeè Nyúè foñ naè yu.”	"Jesus said to her, ""Don't hold me, for I haven't yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brothers, and tell them, 'I am ascending to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God.'"""
Woweèe a natïû aèfo, a niñ mbe keñ a du aè rla' Antïìyoèk, faèdïì' ce a m fa woweèe mbaè mmbo Nyúè tá Nyúè bo keè'ni woweèe, tá woweèe a gee rfaè' ce woweèe a m geèe a misi naè.	From there they sailed to Antioch, from where they had been committed to the grace of God for the work which they had fulfilled.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a laa neè ye enáê, “Yi ka' ba wa'a neè mbañruèñwáè ba ñgwa yïì, baná yi boèñ ená ñwáè lor ñgwa ka'.”	"His disciples said to him, ""If this is the case of the man with his wife, it is not expedient to marry."""
Ñwáè ce Nyúè aè tuu ce suñ beèe blaâa Nyúè, njobeè' Nyúè aè loèr yi Yú' a fa neè ye a bár yuu mo' ka'.	For he whom God has sent speaks the words of God; for God gives the Spirit without measure.
Pailáèt aè ka' yu' blaèa ca, a fúr Jisoès njepmbeè, a cu mbe dïì' mnsa' tá e bo teni mnsa'. A m ce too dïì' ca ená dïì' ce a feèe neè bluèr. A m ce too dïì' anaè aè li Hibruè enáê, “Gaèbataè.”	"When Pilate therefore heard these words, he brought Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called ""The Pavement,"" but in Hebrew, ""Gabbatha."""
Ncïìndap Nyúè moè' yu ce Nyúè aè m be laa yuu ce e m laèa neè muu yïì neè ye ka'. E m laèa neè muu yïì enáê, “Cu a máâ bo maè' caar tá m gee tá aè tár mkuèu mbenduè beèe ce a baèa wáè.”	"But which of the angels has he told at any time, ""Sit at my right hand, until I make your enemies the footstool of your feet?"""
a fe'shi blaèa Tata aè rla' Págaè, a nati a du aè rla' AÈtalïìyaè.	When they had spoken the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia.
Baná aèmboè Kraâis aè m yá ñgá' aè nfeè' ce e m ba aè ñwáè, a yu' ryañ se naè, wee weèe foñ aè ba túr ba njáèá ntee ce e m túr, njobeè' ñwáè ce e ka' yá ñgá' wa'a, baná ñgaèñ aè gaèpni a yuu bebep.	Forasmuch then as Christ suffered for us in the flesh, arm yourselves also with the same mind; for he who has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin;
Pitaè aè laèa neè ye enáê, “Weèe nduu woè aè kwaè'shi a byemi ená weèe be moèoshi Yú' Tata Nyúè njoká? Yáê! Mkuèu beèe ce a tuñ nduu woè mi yu kuè ncúèúndúè'. Woweèe a be byáè' wáè fúú aègho foñ.”	"But Peter asked her, ""How is it that you have agreed together to tempt the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who have buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out."""
Nyo ce wèr à ba lipshi nà ku bii ntèe.	The snake that we had beaten is still alive.
“Musïìs aè ka' baè' bfeè' mñkyeèe, a kwa'shi aè rcaè'ni bfúr vi ce a m ba boo Isráèl.	But when he was forty years old, it came into his heart to visit his brothers, the children of Israel.
A mbuèu ce máè m kwaè'shi máná m loo bfúr ca tá woweèe a du entombïì yá weèe, tá a bo baashi rfa ce weèe aè m kaè'ni aè rfa na mbe dïû' mo'sir tá m ka' vúè. Weèe aè ka' gee wa'a, yi duñshïì ená weèe aè fa njobeè' weèe aè koèñ aè rfa ke' ba njobeè' a taèa weèe taèa ka'.	I thought it necessary therefore to entreat the brothers that they would go before to you, and arrange ahead of time the generous gift that you promised before, that the same might be ready as a matter of generosity, and not of greediness.
Beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a ká' a ce de'ñger a ce laèa enáê, “Ñgaâa ñgeèe buu bbebep a vúè, ñwáè ca aè konïì woweèe, a ce yeñger a woweèe.”	"The Pharisees and the scribes murmured, saying, ""This man welcomes sinners, and eats with them."""
Ñwáè ka' riñ aè rlaèa bli enjep ñgoèñ na, ker laa bli ce bcïìndap Nyúè a ke laèa, ke' koñ beèe ka', baná ñgaèñ ku ba aèmboè mbee ce e ke laèa ñooñ-ñooñ naè.	If I speak with the languages of men and of angels, but don't have love, I have become sounding brass, or a clanging cymbal.
njobeè' yuu mini yi yu njep seèe, yi be kuè ba njo nfeseè.	for the truth's sake, which remains in us, and it will be with us forever:
Ŋwɛ̀ tʉʼ kaʼ zhe ŋwɛ̀ banɛ a be jùu ye efa làʼ.	If a witch kills a person, therefore he will be driven away from the village.
Baná seèe aè yá seè'ni ená woweèe a m duè ba' aè dïì' ce Nyúè aè m kaè' ená woweèe a be duè baè' naè ka', njobeè' woweèe a m byemi neè ye ka'.	We see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.
doc à gaasi maŋgʉp efa ndùu booŋgʉp.	The hawk has scared the mother fowl from the chicks.
“Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsïî. Weèe yu ñgaâa bo' wee btu njobeè' weèe aè cete ncúèúndúè' ce yi ce duè mbe dïû' kúú Nyúè aè bsii beèe. Weèe ce duè mbo ka', a ma'shi ená beèe ce a ce gheèter aè rduè mbo naè a du ka'.	"Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you devour widows' houses, and as a pretense you make long prayers. Therefore you will receive greater condemnation.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	23	14	Ndoèo aè co' weèe ce ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ba beèe Farïìsïî, weèe yu ñgaâa mbo'ni. Wee ke bo' byepkúú, ye yaèp buu wááwá. Wee ke geèe mloo msaèsap aè rduèñshi neè beèe ená weèe rïìñ aè rloo seê. Baná yeè ñgá' be keèe ba goèr seê.	But woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men; for you don't enter in yourselves, neither do you allow those who are entering in to enter."
M ce suñ weèe máná beèe magoèr a be keèe vúè ekuè mbuèuntii ba embaè mbuèuntii cute a Abraèhaêm, ba Aisïìk, ba Jakoèp weèe aè ñkaè', mbe nto' Nyúè.	I tell you that many will come from the east and the west, and will sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven,
Zhi ŋgèe zhi koʼsi ye mbekì.	Her attitude has raised her up.
M ce geèe buu ca wa'a, tá beèe a bo yu' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ tá má máè koni bghoènïì ce nsuñ anaè e ke geèe beèe a konïì.	Now I do this for the sake of the Good News, that I may be a joint partaker of it.
Efa múè buu bteèe ca, yïì entombïì yi m feese búrúè'. Yïì embenjïì yi feeseè nduu naè'. Yïì embenjïì yïì ce e m feese nduu naè' naè aè túr bsii vi feeseè bsii ñwáè. Yïì elúèsimbuèu aè ba aèmboè waèawa mñkuèr ce e ce fáñ wa'a.	The first creature was like a lion, and the second creature like a calf, and the third creature had a face like a man, and the fourth was like a flying eagle.
A ka' fúr ye aèwañ, muu Fároè ce aè m ba muunje, aè lor ye a du aègho, a ke' aègho aèmboè muu yïì.	When he was thrown out, Pharaoh's daughter took him up, and reared him as her own son.
Beèe magoèr a ce duè a yeâ mbuèu njobeè' mncoèo ce e m geèe. E m geèe ñgaâa byañ a ke'seè.	A great multitude followed him, because they saw his signs which he did on those who were sick.
Tata Nyúè e ke sa' seèe wa'a ce naèshi seèe naèshi faè dïì' seèe bo keè gweè mnsa', yá ñgá' aè nfeè' ce e be sa' ñgoèñ naè ka'.	But when we are judged, we are punished by the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the world.
a ce keè' ená e laa mú yuu mo' bebep tá a bo koo ye.	lying in wait for him, and seeking to catch him in something he might say, that they might accuse him.
E kòŋ mɛ̀ sê, buuwaʼlàr e ba fa mɛ̀ zhii mbàa kaʼ.	He loves me so much otherwise he wouldnʼt have given me his money.
Weèe be táá aè bsii Nyúè wa'a, ce weèe ka' ku lá ntee neè Jisos kraâis aè nfeè' wááwá, táá tatap keè' ce cïì'ti ka', kuè ce keè' ba buu ce beèe ce a m feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca neè weèe a m suñ weèe ená weèe be koni naè. Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca yu ba nsuñ ce a feè'shi neè beèe wááwá enjep ñgoèñ na. Rfaè' ce má máâ Pol ce geèe foñ li yu ená m suñ Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca neè beèe.	if it is so that you continue in the faith, grounded and steadfast, and not moved away from the hope of the Good News which you heard, which is being proclaimed in all creation under heaven; of which I, Paul, was made a servant.
À be byɛ̀ʼ gòr waʼa, tɛ ndoŋ zhi yaŋ wɛ̀.	If you carry too much like that, your neck will be painful.
Yar neè ñguâp nfi ce Nyúè aè geèe e feeseè ye. Ñguâp nfi ca yu ñgeâe mini ce yi yu yáánïì a ker ba rara.	and put on the new man, who in the likeness of God has been created in righteousness and holiness of truth.
A mbuèu ce bfee Nyúè vi m laèa enáê, ‘M be tuusi ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè ker ba ñgaâa ntuu neè woweèe tá woweèe a koo beèe moè' efa woweèe yúshi, fa ñgá' neè beèe mo' efa woweèe,’	Therefore also the wisdom of God said, 'I will send to them prophets and apostles; and some of them they will kill and persecute,
A mbuèu ce yi yu ená mbañruèñwáè be maè'shi yïì ta ba yïì maê, cu a ñgwa yïì,	For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will join to his wife,
M ker ce bipshi máná beèe Isráèl a m rïìñ ka' lá? M be beèesi neè yuu ce Musïìs aè m sañ eluâuñgoèñ. E m sañ yuu ce Nyúè aè m laèa, enáê, “M be geèe tá weèe ko'ndoñ neè beèe ce a ghááte aè to' ka'. M be geèe tá ntee yi bep weèe neè to' ce yi rïìñ yuu ka'.”	"But I ask, didn't Israel know? First Moses says, ""I will provoke you to jealousy with that which is no nation, with a nation void of understanding I will make you angry."""
A m bi Musïìs aè nfeè' ca, e ba mboèñmboñ se aè bsii Nyúè. E m kuè' mbe ndaèp yïì ta aè mñwáá btar.	At that time Moses was born, and was exceedingly handsome. He was nourished three months in his father's house.
A mboè aè rlaèa bli ce weèe aè be yá'ni ka', yi ku ba wa'a. Baná weèe aè ka' ce koèñ ená Yú' Nyúè yi fa weèe bfee aè rfaè' neè Nyúè, weèe koñ goèr ba njáèá bfee ce aède' vi gee tá cor du kuèntombïì.	So also you, since you are zealous for spiritual gifts, seek that you may abound to the building up of the assembly.
Weèe ce koosimnse njo' buu ce máè suñ weèe na.	But because I have told you these things, sorrow has filled your heart.
E m vúè fa yeâ laè', yïì beèe a konïì ye ka'.	He came to his own, and those who were his own didn't receive him.
Jisoès aè ku laèa neè woweèe aè nfeè' anaè enáê, “Kur neè ntee, a máè. Weèe fa wáp ka'.”	"But immediately Jesus spoke to them, saying ""Cheer up! It is I! Don't be afraid."""
Seèe ka' laa ená seèe túr yuu bebep ka', baná seèe ce bo' viseèe btu, a ker buu mini.	If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the truth is not in us.
Muu Ñwáè be kuè kwe aèmboè Ñwaâ' Nyúè yi laèa. Ka' yi yu wa'a, ndoèo be co' ñwáè ce e be fyeèni ye. Yi yu aèndeèe ená a m ba bi ñwáè anaè ka'.”	"For the Son of Man goes, even as it is written about him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! It would be better for that man if he had not been born."""
ÁÈlisabáèt aè ka' yu' aèmboè e caè'ni ye, muu enjep yeâ rbúè aè karsïì nyor. ÁÈlisabáèt aè ruusïì neè Yú' Rara,	It happened, when Elizabeth heard Mary's greeting, that the baby leaped in her womb, and Elizabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit.
Jisòs be kèe sùu embe bùu.	Jesus shall descend from Heaven.
Yi yu ená beèe wááwá a ce kweñger njobeè' a yu raèraè Adaèm, a ba ená Nyúè be keè fúr beèe ce a yu a Jisoès weèe aèbee efa rkwe.	For as in Adam all die, so also in Christ all will be made alive.
Byú' mnyúâmkaè' anaè vi bu' mmbo neè Jisoès, a laa enáê, “Wáè ka' ce fúr weèr, aè laa tá weèr du niñ njep kúr ñkuânyaèm ca.”	"The demons begged him, saying, ""If you cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of pigs."""
Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Bsïìi vi túr bto, bsiñ vi túr mndap, Muu Ñwáè aè ke' túr dïì' ce aède' e lá yi tu ka'.”	"Jesus said to him, ""The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky have nests, but the Son of Man has no place to lay his head."""
Baná Sataèn ka' ce fúr Sataèn enjep beèe baná ñgaèpni yi yu nje yeâ nyoèr. Yi ka' ba wa'a, aède' yi to' yi táá aè njáâá ká? M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' weèe aè laèa ená m ce fúr byú' mnyúâmkaè' enjep beèe ba aè ñger Básábuèl.	If Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom stand? For you say that I cast out demons by Beelzebul.
Cena yu nfúú efa rkwe ce entoèmbïì. Bár beèe ce a m kweñger naè a m ker fúú efa rkwe ka', caar tá bfeè' ncúèkïì ca vi mïî.	The rest of the dead didn't live until the thousand years were finished. This is the first resurrection.
Judas IÌskarïìyoèt ce aè m ba moè' efa beèe ncoèp-baa-aè rrúèú aè m duè a yá beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì tá e bo fyeèni Jisoès neè woweèe.	Judas Iscariot, who was one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, that he might deliver him to them.
Mboâñtu mi yu yi neè weèe njobeè' me mmir mi ce yá buu, wee btuè' vi ce yu' buu.	"But blessed are your eyes, for they see; and your ears, for they hear.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	17	M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ku' ñgaâa ncep ntuu Nyúè magoèr, ba beèe ce a m ba yáánïì aè bsii Nyúè a m ce koèñ aè ryá yuu ce weèe ce yá na, a yá ka', a koñ aè ryu' yuu ce weèe ce yu' na, a yu' ka'.	For most certainly I tell you that many prophets and righteous men desired to see the things which you see, and didn't see them; and to hear the things which you hear, and didn't hear them.
Matthew	Matïìyoè	13	18	“Baná weèe yu' laè mbuèu efa ñgaèa ñwáè mbyeè buu.	Hear, then, the parable of the farmer."
Mú mnoèñ vi ka' caèa, weèr aè kur buu a du aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	After these days we took up our baggage and went up to Jerusalem.
Waè' ku' buu ce Yú' anaè yi geèe weèe aè riñ na vi ku bú aè cicïì a? M ce kwaè'shi wa' ka'.	Did you suffer so many things in vain, if it is indeed in vain?
E m yá ñgwañkúñwáè moè' ce e m ba ñwáè fuèp aèmboè e fa mbaèa baa njep ñkuèp anaè.	He saw a certain poor widow casting in two small brass coins.
Hároèd aè laa enáê, “Máè m tee tu ese Joân. Baná ñwáè ce máè ka' ce yu' ku' buu aèmboè ye naè yu ba nda?” E ka' laèa wa'a, a ce gheèter aè ryá ye seê.	"Herod said, ""John I beheaded, but who is this, about whom I hear such things?"" He sought to see him."
beèe mo' a ce laèa yap ená AÈlajaè aè ker nyáá, beèe mo' a ker ce laèa yap ená ñwáè ncep ntuu Nyúè moè' eluâuñgoèñ aè fúú efa rkwe.	and by some that Elijah had appeared, and by others that one of the old prophets had risen again.
Fyeèni neè yeè buu, lor mbaèa efa gho gap neè ñgaâa fuèp. Tar neè bposaè ce aède' vi bep ka', láè neè yeè buu ba mbe buèu mbe dïì' ce aède' vi du aè yuu ka'. AÈde' nyáèá ba' mbo ka'. AÈde' mfyáp vi ye ka'.	Sell that which you have, and give gifts to the needy. Make for yourselves purses which don't grow old, a treasure in the heavens that doesn't fail, where no thief approaches, neither moth destroys.
Neè mini-ñwáè, m be kuè ce lu'shi wa'a duè kuèntombïì, njobeè' m rïìñ máná le rloo ba rjaè' ce li loè ese Yú' Jisoès Kraâis li be geèe tá m luêñ.	For I know that this will turn out to my salvation, through your supplication and the supply of the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
Buu bteèe anaè vi yop yáá a ce kuè'si a ker ce yoèñshi ñwáè ce e m cu mbe kaèbaèraè', aè ba ñwáè ce e ku ba nteèe aè nfeè' wááwá naè.	When the living creatures give glory, honor, and thanks to him who sits on the throne, to him who lives forever and ever,
AÈnaèniyaès aè beesïì enáê, “Tataê, máè yu' beèe a laèa buu magoèr se aèmboè ñwáè ca. Beèe a laèa aèmboè ku' buu bbebep ce e geèe neè yoè beâe aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm.	"But Ananias answered, ""Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how much evil he did to your saints at Jerusalem."
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ enáê, “Ñwáè wááwá ce e ka' war aè rlii Tataê, baná ñgaèñ be luèñ” naè.	"For, ""Whoever will call on the name of the Lord will be saved."""
Ñwáè tañshi tañshïì moè' aè lo a ce suèu njep nduunjïì anaè aè nfeè' anaè foñ, a ka' yá ye, a lá' yi yu a caa a duê.	By chance a certain priest was going down that way. When he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
Woowèe a be fʉ kʉʉsi yer mbàa àyàŋsè.	They will give back our money tomorrow.
Saèkaèriyaè ce e m ba tar muu ca, aè m ruu neè Yú' Rara, a cep ntuu Nyúè neè beèe enáê,	His father, Zacharias, was filled with the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
njobeè' a yá aèmboè woweèe a ce cu rcu rrara a ce yu'ni.	seeing your pure behavior in fear.
À kaʼ bèeŋger mbe njì càŋ na à yɛ lɛʼ mrùʼ.	If you turn behind that barn, you will see a calabash of wine.
Buu wááwá ce Nyúè aè m geèe vi cu a ce keè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be geèe tá boo vi a yááti.	For the creation waits with eager expectation for the children of God to be revealed.
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe ce buumi ba ká? Naèti neè mbekïì, gee rloo, faè dïì' weèe bo gweè rmoèoshïì ka'.”	"and said to them, ""Why do you sleep? Rise and pray that you may not enter into temptation."""
Pailáèt aè ker bipshi neè woweèe enáê, “Baná m gee má ká neè ñwáè ce weâe too ená ñkúú Jus na?”	"Pilate again asked them, ""What then should I do to him whom you call the King of the Jews?"""
Nyúè aè m geèe ená buu ca ba wa'a njobeè' e m koèñ ená muu yïì ba yáánïì aèmboè ye ye yu naè aè buu wááwá.	For all the fullness was pleased to dwell in him;
AÈpoloès aè ka' ba aè rla' Koreèn, Pol aè jár neè mkuèu a du a ba' aè rla' Áfásoès. E ka' baè' a yá beèe mo' efa ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès.	It happened that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul, having passed through the upper country, came to Ephesus, and found certain disciples.
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ mbe Ñwaâ' Nyúè enáê, “Yi ka' ba wa'a, baná mbañruèñwáè be maè'shi yïì ta ba yïì maê, cu a ñgwa yïì, tá a ye a ba ñwáè moè'sir” naè.	For this cause a man will leave his father and mother, and will be joined to his wife. The two will become one flesh.
Beèe mo' a laa yap enáê, “Yú' nyúèrkaè' yi ka' karsi ñwáè tu, e laa njáèá buu ca ka'. AÈde' yú' nyúèrkaè' yi gee nfeèp ce yá buu aè njáâá ká?”	"Others said, ""These are not the sayings of one possessed by a demon. It isn't possible for a demon to open the eyes of the blind, is it?"""
tá e lor fa neè yïì nyor aèmboè ñgwaguâu mboèñmboñ ce e yu nyáánïì, a ba nrara, a túr faèa koo múcaèr ka'.	that he might present the assembly to himself gloriously, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish.
Baná weèe roo ba kúú Nyúè tá e fa buu ca neè weèe foñ.	But seek God's Kingdom, and all these things will be added to you.
Jisoès aè beesïì neè ye enáê, “M suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè máná, ñwáè ce e ka' ma'shi yïì ndap, káè bfúr vi, káè bjar vi, káè yïì taê, káè yïì maê, káè boo vi, káè vi mñkúè, aètu máè, ker ba njobeè' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ,	"Jesus said, ""Most certainly I tell you, there is no one who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or land, for my sake, and for the sake of the Good News,"
Munte koŋ mcɛ̌r gòr.	A child likes play a lot.
Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a duê, a yáá ye, a laa neè ye enáê, “Tataê, jaè' weèr, seèe aè kwe.”	"They came to him, and woke him up, saying, ""Save us, Lord! We are dying!"""
Baná bcïìndap Nyúè ku ba ba byú' ce vi ke geèe rfaè' neè Nyúè. E ke tuu vi ená vi du ja' beèe ce e be geèe tá woweèe a luêñ.	Aren't they all serving spirits, sent out to do service for the sake of those who will inherit salvation?
Weèe aè ka' koni fáñ aè rgeèe yuu boèñboñ weèe gee yi, njobeè' buu bbebep aè kuè' aè ñgoèñ seè'ni na.	redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
À be kèe dù nyʉ̀ kɛ?	Which day shall you go?
Ñgaâa yá'ni buu Joân a m yá buu ca a suñ Joân. E ká' beèe a mmbaa efa waâp mú,	The disciples of John told him about all these things.
Bsaèp ba bbáèr efa rla' anaè vi m ku ba yáánïì. Ncïìndap Nyúè aè ka' feè' rla' anaè, bsaèp efa gho vi ba bkïìlomátaè ncúèkïì-baa neè mnjeâe-mmbaa ba ncoèp- baa-aè-mmbaa. (2,222) Bbáèr efa gho vi ku ba wa'a. Bsaèp embekïì vi ku ba foñ wa'a.	The city lies foursquare, and its length is as great as its breadth. He measured the city with the reed, Twelve thousand twelve stadia. Its length, breadth, and height are equal.
AÈ ka' ba aèmboè bcïìndap, e a laa enáê, “Nyúè aè m geèe vi bcïìndap a ba aèmboè fu', yi ñgaâa mfaè' anaè a ba aèmboè mcuèñ mor.”	"Of the angels he says, ""Who makes his angels winds, and his servants a flame of fire."""
M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená faèdïì' wááwá ce a ka' fe'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ ca njep ñgoèñ na, a be suñ yuu ce e geèe na, ce kuushi ye.”	"Most certainly I tell you, wherever this Good News is preached in the whole world, what this woman has done will also be spoken of as a memorial of her."""
A m ce ye Ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aè bfeè' wááwá baná govanoè be fúr ñwáè shañ moè' embe shañ. E m ce fúr ba ñwáè ce aè laèa beèe ená e fúr.	Now at the feast the governor was accustomed to release to the multitude one prisoner, whom they desired.
Ñwáè aè ka' ce geèe yuu ce Nyúè ce koèñ, baná ñgaèñ yu nfúraè, ba njar yaè, ba yaè maê.”	"For whoever does the will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother."""
E dù banɛ m̀ be dù foŋ.	He has gone, therefore I will also go.
AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce a m koo Joân a fa aè shañ, Jisoès aè du aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, a ce feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ yïì Nyúè neè beèe.	Now after John was taken into custody, Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Good News of the Kingdom of God,
Nfò à faa enɛ e be lìp Nyakò.	Nfor has planned to beat Nyako.
Yàa tarkʉ à còo mɛ̀ mŋkàa kù tù.	My grand father has marked me with a sacrificial powder on the forehead.
Woweèe a m tami nyor aè rkwe njo' máè. AÈ ku yoñshi ba máè woweèe caè'caè' ka', bcor wááwá ce ñgaâa rbyemïì embo yu beèe enje jáá, a yoèñshi woweèe foñ.	who for my life, laid down their own necks; to whom not only I give thanks, but also all the assemblies of the Gentiles.
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ entombïì embe múè ñgaèa anaè aè mbuèuñkuèr, ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a kaarïì aèbee mbe ndaèp, a li' keèñ njobeè' woweèe a m ce wáp Juês. Jisoès aè ku nyáá a waâp mú, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Cumúnyañ ba neè weèe.”	"When therefore it was evening, on that day, the first day of the week, and when the doors were locked where the disciples were assembled, for fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and said to them, ""Peace be to you."""
AÈ ka' ba nyúè moè', Jisoès aè ka' ce yá'ni beèe, beèe Farïìsi ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir ce a m vúâ aè bu' mla' aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè wááwá ker ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm a cuteè aèfo. Tata Nyúè aè m fa Jisoès ñger aè rgeèe tá ñgaâa byañ a ke'se.	It happened on one of those days, that he was teaching; and there were Pharisees and teachers of the law sitting by, who had come out of every village of Galilee, Judea, and Jerusalem. The power of the Lord was with him to heal them.
A m sañ rlii a yeâ cáè' ce e m maè' aè nyoèr ker ba a yi ká'shi. Rlii ce a m sañ anaè li m ba enáê, “Ñkúú ce e caèa bkúú wááwá. Tata ce e caèa btata wááwá.”	"He has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, ""KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS."""
Pitaè aè kanïì, a laa neè ye enáê, “M rïìñ ye ka'. M rïìñ yuu ce aè ce laèa anaè ka'.” A ka' laèa wa'a, a lá'si nyor embe mambe a táá njep mntosïì. [E ka' táá njo, nduñgúp aè toêñ.]	"But he denied it, saying, ""I neither know, nor understand what you are saying."" He went out on the porch, and the rooster crowed."
buu wááwá ce e m geèe be luñ efa rbúèteè, tá vi bo koni rboèñ efa foèo ce boo Nyúè a be koni.	that the creation itself also will be delivered from the bondage of decay into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
AÈ m ba nyúè moè' Jisoès aè niñ mbe keñ a ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Seèe tuu túè ca du neèñguñ.” E ka' laèa wa'a, a woweèe a ká' a ce tuu.	"Now it happened on one of those days, that he entered into a boat, himself and his disciples, and he said to them, ""Let's go over to the other side of the lake."" So they launched out."
Ñwáè ce e ka' ce geèe buu bbebep baná ñgaèñ koèñ rraa ka', a koñ aè rbaè' faèdïì' rraa li yu ka', tá yïì buu bbebep bo yááti aèwañ ka'.	For everyone who does evil hates the light, and doesn't come to the light, lest his works would be exposed.
Woweèe a m ce laèa ená woweèe a túr bfee, a kúti ba blúr.	Professing themselves to be wise, they became fools,
Woweèe a koèñ ená beèe a ca'ni woweèe aè mntaa, a ker koñ foñ ená beèe a too woweèe ená Rabaèi.	the salutations in the marketplaces, and to be called 'Rabbi, Rabbi' by men.
Bfúr waê, weèr ce laèa neè weèe ená weèe fa ncep neè beèe ce a yu bbor, fa ñger neè beèe ce wap mntee vi ce bu', ja' beèe ce a sáè, túr ntee boèñboñ neè ñwáè wááwá.	We exhort you, brothers, admonish the disorderly, encourage the fainthearted, support the weak, be patient toward all.
e ye leè', a ka' ená e be fa ye yuu ce e ka' laa ená e fa ye.	Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she should ask.
Mmbo mmap mi sîi.	Their hands are dirty.
Nyúè ce e ke fa seèe cumúnyañ, gee tá weèe cu rcu rrara, túr faèa koo múcaèr ka', ker gee tá faèa ba aè yuu ce weèe ce geèe káè aè yuu ce weèe ce kwaè'shi ka', kuè ba bboèñboñ aè buu wááwá du ba' aè nfeè' ce Tata Jisos Kraâis be vúè.	May the God of peace himself sanctify you completely. May your whole spirit, soul, and body be preserved blameless at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Pitaè aè beesïì enáê, “E ke laè' bkïìloè.” Jisoès aè laa neè ye enáê, “Baná aède' ñgaâa to' a la' ka'.	"Peter said to him, ""From strangers."" Jesus said to him, ""Therefore the children are exempt."
Máè m ker yá ñwáè ntuu moè' efa múè ñgaâa ntuu entombïì naè ka'. Máè m ku yá ba Jáms ce e yu nfúr Tata Jisoès.	But of the other apostles I saw no one, except James, the Lord's brother.
Yi m loè ku ce maè' ye njep mor ba njep roè aè ryú ye. Ka' ba ená aède' aè gee yuu mo', aè koosïìmnse neè weèr, ja' weèr.”	"Often it has cast him both into the fire and into the water, to destroy him. But if you can do anything, have compassion on us, and help us."""
Mɛ̀ nyii ye ya cɛ̀ʼ, e ku ce bàŋ mmir àmbù mo.	I refused to give him my shirt and he is still coveting it.
AÈde' seèe laa wa'a njobeè' Máèlkisidáèk aè m duè aè rkoni Abraèham ce e m ba tarkú Lávïì, a be bi Lávïì ka'.	for he was yet in the body of his father when Melchizedek met him.
Jisoès aè m rïìñ ená beèe anaè a ce roèo aè rkoo ye aè ñger, ghar aè ñkúú. E ka' rïìñ wa'a, a nati a beeñger aè ñgúè' rtuèu moè' a cu aèfo mimñgi'.	Jesus therefore, perceiving that they were about to come and take him by force, to make him king, withdrew again to the mountain by himself.
Woweèe a du mcúè, a seesi enáê, “Seèe ka' laa seená yi ñger anaè yi m loè ese Nyúè, baná e be bipshi neè seèe enáê, ‘Weèe aè m ka' ba byemi yuu ce e m laèa ka' njoká?’	"They reasoned with themselves, saying, ""If we say, 'From heaven,' he will say, 'Why didn't you believe him?'"
E ka' kúti, a ker yá aèmboè woweèe a ce buumi, mmirlo mi ku ce duè neè woweèe duè. Woweèe a túr yuu ce a laa neè ye ka'.	Again he returned, and found them sleeping, for their eyes were very heavy, and they didn't know what to answer him.
Saimúèn ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba, a fúú a ce roèo ye.	Simon and those who were with him followed after him;
Yi ba seè'ni ená weèe to'shi yeè buu bbebep, ñwáè to'shi vi neè ñwáè; loo neè neè wee btu, ñwáè loo neè ñwáè, tá Yú' yi bo jaè' weèe tá weèe ke'si efa wee byañ. Ñwáâ mboèñmboñ ka' loo yuu ese Nyúè neè yi ntee-ñwáè, Nyúè yu' li rloo cárcár seê.	Confess your offenses to one another, and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The insistent prayer of a righteous person is powerfully effective.
Mbeèñ aè ka' gweê, nshe nyoñ mbeèñ anaè, byee ce beèe a byeè vi ku' ja' beèe anaè baná Nyúè be ghoèni nshe anaè.	For the land which has drunk the rain that comes often on it, and brings forth a crop suitable for them for whose sake it is also tilled, receives blessing from God;
Weèe aè duèñshi njáèá rkoèñnïì ca neè bfúr wee wááwá ce a yu aè ñgoâñ Máèsáèdonïìyaè. Bfúr waê, weèr ce tapsi weèe ená weèe gee tá njáèá rkoèñnïì ca li du ba kuèntombïì.	for indeed you do it toward all the brothers who are in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, that you abound more and more;
Woweèe a ku ce kwaè'shi ba aèmboè bbyeèñge aè nfeè' wááwá, a ke' sáè efa rgeèe buu bbebep ka'. Woweèe a ka' yá beèe ce a táá tatap ka', baná a be bo' woweèe tá woweèe a bo geèe buu bbebep foñ. Woweèe a weti a lááte nje múè ñgeèe bwer. Woweèe a gweè mnsa' Nyúè war.	having eyes full of adultery, and who can't cease from sin; enticing unsettled souls; having a heart trained in greed; children of cursing;
AÈ m ba nyúè mmbomntaa Nyúè moè', Jisoès ba ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a caa aè ñkúè msañ moè'. Ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu a tee msañ anaè a ce si'si mbaè mmboè a ce ye.	Now it happened on the second Sabbath after the first, that he was going through the grain fields. His disciples plucked the heads of grain, and ate, rubbing them in their hands.
M rïìñ máná m be vúè caè'ni weèe tá seèe koni bghoènïì ese Kraâis goèr seê.	I know that, when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the Good News of Christ.
Beèe a ka' riñ buu Nyúè ca wa'a, beesi njïì neè ye, baná njïì moè' ker ba aègho ce aède' ñwáè geêe, woweèe a beesïì yap ntee aè nfeè' moè' ka', njobeè' woweèe a ka' beesi njïì wa'a, baná woweèe a ker taa Jisos Kraâis mbe kïìntaa, a ker coosi ye aè múè beèe, a bá sá' efa li rkwe.	and then fell away, it is impossible to renew them again to repentance; seeing they crucify the Son of God for themselves again, and put him to open shame.
Gheèter neè cu neè cumúnyañ-ñwáè tá weèe bo cu aèbee aèmboè beèe ce Yú' Nyúè yi geèe a ba ñwáè moè'sir.	being eager to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.
Seèe aè rïìñ seená aètaè byee vi gee seèe seèe ba jáá aè bsii Nyúè ka'. Seèe ka' tá ye ka', yïì anaè yi túr yuu mo' aè rgeèe ka'. Seèe ka' ye, yïì anaè yi gee seèe seèe ba jáá ka'.	But food will not commend us to God. For neither, if we don't eat, are we the worse; nor, if we eat, are we the better.
Baná Nyúè e ke koosimnse neè ñwáè ce e koèñ aè rkoosimnse neè ye, ker teesi tu ese ñwáè ce e koèñ aè rteèesi tu ese ye.	So then, he has mercy on whom he desires, and he hardens whom he desires.
Bfúr waê, weèe ce weèe aè byemi neè yïìseèe Tata Jisos Kraâis ce e yu ñwáè foèo, weèe fa so'niñgoèñ ka'.	My brothers, don't hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory with partiality.
Ce ke' neè noèñ ce Nyúè be vúè, ker gheter foñ gee tá noèñ ca yi yañse ba. Be ba aè noèñ anaè tá rbuu ba nshe a bú, tá buu wááwá she dúèdúè.	looking for and earnestly desiring the coming of the day of God, which will cause the burning heavens to be dissolved, and the elements will melt with fervent heat?
AÈmboè buu ca yu wa'a, fa maè'shi neè tá ñwáè moè' gee mncir neè weèe aèmboè buu ce aède' weèe ye, ker ba buu ce aède' weèe no ka'. Fa maè'shi neè foñ tá ñwáè moè' gee mncir neè weèe aèmboè njáèá njïì ce aède' weèe gee mñkaè' ka', káè yu ñkaè' enjep feè' áè, káè yu Ñkaâ' ñwáá fi áè, káè yu Ñkaâ' mmbomntaa áè.	Let no one therefore judge you in eating, or in drinking, or with respect to a feast day or a new moon or a Sabbath day,
Baná yi yu ená beèe a ke yu' wáá ka' byemi; beèe a feè'shi aèmboè Kraâis wáá, beèe a ka' yu'.	So faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Seèe fa koo ye aè múè ñkaè' ka' njobeè' seèe ka' koo ye aè múè ñkaè', beèe a lo ká' ñgá'.”	"For they said, ""Not during the feast, because there might be a riot of the people."""
Cena yu buu ce Jisos Kraâis aè m geèe beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Nyúè a rïîñ. Nyúè aè m geèe Jisos Kraâis a riñ buu ca tá e bo geèe tá beèe ce a ce duè aèmbuèu Nyúè a riñ buu ce vi be koni nfeè' múcaèr. Yi ka' ba wa'a, Jisos Kraâis aè tuu yïì ncïìndap ená e du yá Joân ce e yu yïì ñwáè rfaè', gee tá e yá buu ca.	This is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave him to show to his servants the things which must happen soon, which he sent and made known by his angel to his servant, John,
Jisoès aè ku cip, a laa yuu ka'. E ker bipshi neè ye enáê, “A wáè Kraêis, Muu Nyúè ce weèr ce gú'shi neè ye naè a?”	"But he stayed quiet, and answered nothing. Again the high priest asked him, ""Are you the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?"""
“Ñgaâa yá'ni yoè buu a fúú enjep ndeèe ce viseèe bta a m yá'ni seèe njoká? Woweèe a ke suè'si mmbo aè njïû yáánïì ka' ye byee ka'.”	Why do your disciples disobey the tradition of the elders? For they don't wash their hands when they eat bread.
Baná m ce koèñ máná weèe riñ ená nsuñ Nyúè ce kuu rluèñ aè duè neè beèe enje jáá. Woweèe a be yu'shi boèñboñ.”	Be it known therefore to you, that the salvation of God is sent to the nations. They will also listen.
Weèe aè ka' koñni wa'a, baná beèe wááwá a be rïìñ ená weèe yu ñgaâa yá'ni yaè buu.”	"By this everyone will know that you are my disciples, if you have love for one another."""
AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè máè, nfeè' ce gháá ce m be fa la ryoèñ neè Nyúè aèmboè tañshïì wa'a. Nfeè' ce m be maè'shi aè gháá.	For I am already being offered, and the time of my departure has come.
E ka' yá aèmboè fu' yi ce caèa neè ñger-ñwáè, a wáp, a ká' a ce suèu njep múè roè, a waa a laa enáê, “Tataê, jaè' máè.”	"But when he saw that the wind was strong, he was afraid, and beginning to sink, he cried out, saying, ""Lord, save me!"""
Jisoès aè m káè' a ce yá'ni ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená Muu Ñwáè be kuè yá ñgá' goèr seê, tá bleebeèe ba beâe bgoèrgoèr efa ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì ker ba ñgaâa ryá'ni mncir a kani ye. A be keè yú ye, mnoèñ vi ba btaar, e fúú efa rkwe.	He began to teach them that the Son of Man must suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.
a laa enáê, “Wáè ce aè yu Kraâis anaè, to' ka ená aè lïìp nda wáè lá.”	"saying, ""Prophesy to us, you Christ! Who hit you?"""
AÈ ka' ba aè nfeè' ana neètú' anaè, e lor woweèe a su'si wap mnfur. E ka' suè'si mïìsi, a baptir ye ker ba beèe wááwá embe yeâ ndaèp.	He took them the same hour of the night, and washed their stripes, and was immediately baptized, he and all his household.
Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ kuu Jisoès Kraâis ce e yu Muu Nyúè aè káè' embe na.	The beginning of the Good News of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Bbyɛ̀ŋge a kòŋ mntaŋshì sê.	Women like lies telling too much.
Fa lapni nleeñwáè ka', cep ye aèmboè aède' aè cep yoè taê. Geèe yuu ce aède' aè gee neè bfúr wo neè boo mnsuènsuè.	Don't rebuke an older man, but exhort him as a father; the younger men as brothers;
Weèe fa sa' beèe ce Nyúè aè fa mba weâe mmboè aèmboè weèe yu lá waêp mmasaè wa' ka'. Weèe duñshi ba ndeâe mboèñmboñ, ce woweèe a yá, bo koni.	neither as lording it over those entrusted to you, but making yourselves examples to the flock.
Ncïìndap Nyúè anaè aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Fa wáp neè ka', máè vúè weèe neè nsuñ mboèñmboñ, aè ba nsuñ ce beèe wááwá a be yu', lu'shi seê.	"The angel said to them, ""Don't be afraid, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy which will be to all the people."
Rkìŋ ce rli bʉʼti nà a rlìsò.	This broken pot is ours.
Geewa'a, ñwáè aè ka' ce cu rcu ce Nyúè koèñ, yuu ce e túr yi ghááteè ye, baná ñgaèñ aè koni sá' seê.	But godliness with contentment is great gain.
Yi yu wa'a njobeè' yi ke niñ ba njep ntee ka', yi ke niñ ba njep rbúè, fúú enjo.” E ka' laèa wa'a a raasi ená byee wááwá vi yu bboèñboñ aè bsii Nyúè.	"because it doesn't go into his heart, but into his stomach, then into the latrine, thus purifying all foods?"""
M ce suñ weèe máná m be keèr no mruè' ce a geèe neè mbaèñ ce na ka' caar baè' aè noèñ ce m be no mïû mfi weèe seèe weèe mbe dïû' kúú yaè Taê.”	"But I tell you that I will not drink of this fruit of the vine from now on, until that day when I drink it anew with you in my Father's Kingdom."""
Mki mi ghupti njep mbùu rkiŋ.	The potash has coagulated under the pot.
Mɛ̀ bʉsi mbàa njoʼ muu wàa.	I have sacrificed money for the sake of my child.
A ye e ce vʉ̌ à tètè nà.	There he is coming from afar.
E jʉ̀p coʼ mbe lùr.	He has hit an iron on the stone.
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Duè neè nje rla' enje weâe cuèu na. Weèe be baè' njo tá weèe ku yá aèmboè a cúú jaèaki', muu aè táá aègee mo. Fyáèá neè vú aègho fa neè máè.	"saying to them, ""Go into the village that is opposite you, and immediately you will find a donkey tied, and a colt with her. Untie them, and bring them to me."
Seèe cu bteèe a ce jáèr, a ba aègho njo' ye. Yi ku ba aèmboè yeè beèe ce a ke sañ mghaèghar a laèa. Woweèe a laèa enáê, ‘Neè mini-ñwáè, seèe yu boo vi.’	For in him we live, and move, and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his offspring.'
Woweèe a rïìñ yuu ka'. Woweèe a kaè' yuu, gee yuu anaè ka', a ce koèñ beèe ka', a ce koosimnse neè beèe ka'.	without understanding, covenant breakers, without natural affection, unforgiving, unmerciful;
Weèr aè ka' baè' aè rla' Ruêm, a ma'shi Poêl, e ce cu neè yi tu, ñwáè soogáè moè' aè ce keè'ni ye.	When we entered into Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard, but Paul was allowed to stay by himself with the soldier who guarded him.
Máâ loo wa'a ce yoèñshi Nyúè njobeè' m ce kuushi aèmboè weèe aè koni máè aè rfaè' Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ, ká' embe nfeè' ce weèe aè m byemi neè Nyúè vú gháá seè'ni na.	for your partnership in furtherance of the Good News from the first day until now;
Rïìñ ená be keè ba aè nfeè' elúèsimbuèu tá ñgá' ba seê.	But know this, that in the last days, grievous times will come.
Ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè bsoogáè rjeèe naè aè ka' yu' ca, a du a suñ neè tu yïû goèr. E m laèa neè ye enáê, “AÈ be geèe wáká seè'ni aè? Ñwáè ca yu ñwáè Ruêm.”	"When the centurion heard it, he went to the commanding officer and told him, ""Watch what you are about to do, for this man is a Roman!"""
A mbuèu ntee yi ce kwe weèr ka'. Ka' wer mnyor vi káè' a ce sáè wa'a, ryoâñ rfi ce li yu njep weèr naè, li ce top aè mnoèñ wááwá.	Therefore we don't faint, but though our outward man is decaying, yet our inward man is renewed day by day.
Bsogɛ̀ a bèe ce a ke màʼ bir nè toʼ.	Soldiers are those who fight when the country is at war.
Beèe ce a ke suñ beèe buu ce Nyúè aè geèe woweèe aè rïîñ, a ke túr ñger aè rfaè' neè bfee ce Nyúè aè fa woweèe anaè boèñboñ.	The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets,
E shoo, a laa enáê, “Beèe e luèuni a ce roèo mncoâo bghagha' wa'a njoká? AÈi', m suñ weèe máná aède' m duñshïì ncoèo neè beèe ca ka'.”	"He sighed deeply in his spirit, and said, ""Why does this generation seek a sign? Most certainly I tell you, no sign will be given to this generation."""
Tá m ka' laèa buu moè', m ce yoèñshi yaè Nyúè aè rlii Jisos Kraâis njo' weèe wááwá, njobeè' beèe a ce suñ aèmboè le rbyemïì aè bdïì' wááwá.	First, I thank my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed throughout the whole world.
Ñwáè ce e ka' túr btuè', ñgaèñ yu'.	If anyone has an ear, let him hear.
E ka' káè' ce fyá', a vú neè ñwáè rfaè' moè' ce e m túr rkaa a ye aè mmalaèr aèñgoo.	When he had begun to reconcile, one was brought to him who owed him ten thousand talents.
Joân aè m jáèr aè bdïì' wááwá ce vi m ba aè ñgoâñ faèdïì' ce rdip Jodaèn li m ba, a ce feè'shi blaâa Nyúè neè beèe, a ce laèa ená woweèe a kupse, ma' yaèp buu bbebep tá a baptir woweèe, tá Nyúè bo foèosi woweèe.	He came into all the region around the Jordan, preaching the baptism of repentance for remission of sins.
E m ba rraa anaè ka'. E m ku vú yi ba aè rsuñ beèe aèmboè rraa anaè.	He was not the light, but was sent that he might testify about the light.
“AÈ ka' ba aèmboè noèñ ba nfeè' ce buu ca vi be koni, ñwáè moè' rïìñ ka', ka' bcïìndap Nyúè, káè Muu Nyúè áè. Ñwáè ce e rïìñ, ku ba ba Taèr caè'caè'.	But no one knows of that day and hour, not even the angels of heaven, but my Father only.
E laa neè Jisoès enáê, “Máè láè mncir ca wááwá ká' aè nfeè' ce máè m ba muu ñká'.”	"He said, ""I have observed all these things from my youth up."""
Pitaè aè ka' yá woweèe, a laa neè woweèe enáê, “Yaè beèe Isráèl, weèe ce báèáñger njo' yuu ce yi koni na, a ce keè' weèr ntuñ-ñ-ñ njoká? Waè' weèe ce kwaè'shi ená weèr aè geèe ñwáè ca aè jár ba aè yer ñger káè njobeè' weèr rïìñ aè rcaè'ni Nyúè boèñboñ a?	"When Peter saw it, he responded to the people, ""You men of Israel, why do you marvel at this man? Why do you fasten your eyes on us, as though by our own power or godliness we had made him walk?"
E laa neè ye enáê, “Wáè bipshi neè máè aèmboè yuu boèñboñ njoká? Ku ba ñwáè moè'sir ce e yu ñwáâ mboèñmboñ. Wáè ka' ce koèñ aè rkoni ryoèñ ce nfeseè, aè lá mncir.”	"He said to him, ""Why do you call me good? No one is good but one, that is, God. But if you want to enter into life, keep the commandments."""
Joân aè beesïì enáê, “A máè ñwáè ce AÈsayaè aè m laèa aèmboè ye eluâuñgoèñ enáê, ‘Njeèndoñ moè' ce fuñ aè ntee rïìñ enáê, Kupshi neè nduunjïì neè Tata.’”	"He said, ""I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness, 'Make straight the way of the Lord,' as Isaiah the prophet said."""
Jisoès aè ka' laèa blaèa ca wáá, mluè mi ká' a ce koo ye. E laa rara enáê, “M ce suñ weèe neè mini-ñwáè ená ñwáè moè' efa weâe mú be fyeèni máè.”	"When Jesus had said this, he was troubled in spirit, and testified, ""Most certainly I tell you that one of you will betray me."""
Beèe ce a woweèe a m ce cu a m wáp seê. Beèe ce a m ba aè bdïì' wááwá aè rla' embe mtuâu aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè a m suñ buu ca.	Fear came on all who lived around them, and all these sayings were talked about throughout all the hill country of Judea.
Mɛ̀ deʼ mɛnɛ m̀ laa yuu e tee mɛ̀.	I wanted to say something and he interrupted me.
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ entombïì efa ñkaè' ce a m ce ye bráâd ce a láè yis njo ka', ñgaâa yá'ni buu Jisoès a vú a yá ye, a bipshi neè ye enáê, “AÈ ce koèñ ená weèr fár byee ba fá tá aè bo ye ñkaâ' caèasi-mndap aègho?”	"Now on the first day of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying to him, ""Where do you want us to prepare for you to eat the Passover?"""
E beesïì neè woweèe enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' juu ñgwa yïì, lor moè', baná e koo njeñwáè ce e yu ñgwa yïì ka',	"He said to them, ""Whoever divorces his wife, and marries another, commits adultery against her."
E màʼ ŋgàa nè mɛ̀.	He has spoken a proverb to me.
a laa neè woweèe enáê, “M ka' fa Jisoès mba weâe mmboè, weèe fa máè ká?” Woweèe a be' mbaèa mntaar a fa neè ye.	"and said, ""What are you willing to give me, that I should deliver him to you?"" They weighed out for him thirty pieces of silver."
Woweèe a laa enáê, “Nfeè' múcaèr ce e ce laèa na, yu ba ená ká? Seèe rïìñ njáèá yuu ce e laèa na ka'.”	"They said therefore, ""What is this that he says, 'A little while?' We don't know what he is saying."""
AÈ ka' ba aè noèñ mo', aèmboè aè nyúè taar neèmootïì, e yá yuu mo' aèmboè rlo wa'a. E m yá ncïìndap Nyúè boèñboñ se aèmboè e vúè, a niñ mbe ndaèp, a laa neè ye enáê, “Koèniyuès.”	"At about the ninth hour of the day, he clearly saw in a vision an angel of God coming to him, and saying to him, ""Cornelius!"""
Woweèe a yu beèe embe ndúè' Abraèham ba Aisïìk ba Jakoèp. A m bi Kraâis aè ñwáè embe ndúè' anaè, e ba Nyúè ce e túr ñger mbenduè buu wááwá. Seèe yoñshi ye aè nfeè' sïìp. Yi yu wa'a.	of whom are the fathers, and from whom is Christ as concerning the flesh, who is over all, God, blessed forever. Amen.
Yïì anaè yi mïì wáá, tá ñgoèñ yi mïî, tá Jisos Kraâis so mnyúâmkaè' ker ba beèe wááwá ce a ce sa', loèr yi kúú fa neè Nyúè ce e yu yïì Taê.	Then the end comes, when he will deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father; when he will have abolished all rule and all authority and power.
Boo vi anaè ku ba beèe ce a túr láá foñ. Jisoès ye ye aè m vúè a ku ba ñwáè aèmboè woweèe tá e bo kwe, bepsi ñger Sataèn, njobeè' Sataèn a ñwáè ce e túr ñger aè rvúè neè rkwe mbenduè beèe.	Since then the children have shared in flesh and blood, he also himself in the same way partook of the same, that through death he might bring to nothing him who had the power of death, that is, the devil,
E ker tuu ñwáè rfaè' moè', woweèe a ker lip ye foñ, a coosi ye, a koosi ye rïìtu, e du mboèmmbo.	He sent yet another servant, and they also beat him, and treated him shamefully, and sent him away empty.
AÈ ka' ba seè'ni ce seèe aè byemi neè Jisoès na yuu mo' yi ker ce naèshi seèe aèmboè yi m ce naèshi naè ka'.	But now that faith has come, we are no longer under a tutor.
Ma kúr beèe yi m ce jáèr a Jisoès weèe, e karsïì nyor a laa neè woweèe enáê,	Now great multitudes were going with him. He turned and said to them,
Woweèe a beesïì neè ye enáê, “Weèr ce roèo ba Jisoès ce aè rla' Nasaráèt.” Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “A máè ye.” Judaès ce e m fyeèni ye naè aè m táá a woweèe.	"They answered him, ""Jesus of Nazareth."" Jesus said to them, ""I am he."" Judas also, who betrayed him, was standing with them."
Visèe bcoʼ vi yû?	Where are our rods?
a bu' mmbo neè ye ená e ma'shi tá woweèe a ku joèo ba yi cuâu cáè'. Ñgaâa byañ wááwá ce a m joèo ye, a m keè'se.	and they begged him that they might just touch the fringe of his garment. As many as touched it were made whole.
M ce baèptir weèe neè mdip, geewa'a e be baèptir yi weèe ba neè Yú' Rara.”	"I baptized you in water, but he will baptize you in the Holy Spirit."""
E laa neè woweèe enáê, “Buu ce aède' beèe a riñ kuu kúú Nyúè ka' naè, Nyúè aè geèe weèe aè rïîñ. AÈ ka' ba yi aèmboè beèe ce a yu yïìseèe beèe ka' naè, a ce suñ woweèe buu wááwá ba aè mñgaèa.	"He said to them, ""To you is given the mystery of the Kingdom of God, but to those who are outside, all things are done in parables,"
Weèe be yu' ená a ce maè' bïìr, keèr yu' aè mñoo ená a ce maè' bïìr aè bdïì' mo' foñ. Weèe ka' yu' wa'a, mluè mi fa koo weèe ka'. Buu ca vi be kuè koni, vi koni wa'a, yi ke' ba ba ená nfeè' ce ñgoèñ yi be mïì aè gháá ka'.	You will hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that you aren't troubled, for all this must happen, but the end is not yet.
Mor anà zhi ce ŋyɛ̀ɛ mʉfɛ̀ɛ sê.	That fire is burning very slowly.
A mbuèu ce Nyúè aè m yá ye aè ñwáâ nyáánïì njo' li rbyemïì.	"Therefore it also was ""reckoned to him for righteousness."""
Kʉʉ e ke lò gee ngòŋ zhi ba àmbò mbeŋ be gwè waʼa.	Harmatan dust makes the weather to look as if it will rain.
a niñ mbe keñ, a ce duè aè rla' Kaèpanuèm ce li m ba neèñguu túè anaè. A ka' ce duè, túè' aè sii woweèe. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' anaè, Jisoès aè be vú a koni woweèe ka'.	and they entered into the boat, and were going over the sea to Capernaum. It was now dark, and Jesus had not come to them.
Woweèe a m túr mú nca foñ. E yoñshïì Nyúè, a fa neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu ená a gapshi neè beèe anaè foñ.	They had a few small fish. Having blessed them, he said to serve these also.
Keè'ni yo tu, lor nfeè' aè yuu ce aè ce yá'ni. Ce gee ba buu ca aè nfeè' wááwá, njobeè' wáè ka' ce geèe vi, baná aè be tee yo tu efa ñgá', keèr tee btu beèe ce a ce yu' buu ce aè ce laèa.	Pay attention to yourself, and to your teaching. Continue in these things, for in doing this you will save both yourself and those who hear you.
Nfò à ba ba mbena ntìni.	Nfor was here today.
Nlaèa ce m be laèa na yu nlaèa mini. Nlaèa anaè yi yu ená ñwáè aè ka' koñ aè rba tu-nta', baná ñgaèñ aè koèñ ba rfaâ' rboèñboñ.	This is a faithful saying: if a man seeks the office of an overseer, he desires a good work.
Ñwáè moè' efa múè beèe ce a m ba a Jisoès aè co' saè', a tee tuè' ese ñkwaèa ñwáè ce e m ba tu neè ñgaâa tañshi tañshïì.	But a certain one of those who stood by drew his sword, and struck the servant of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
Woweèe a m yu'ni foñ njobeè' máè m duèñshi mncoèo ba buu bbáèá, ker ba njo' ñger Yú' Rara. Káâ' ese aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm du ba' aè rla' IÌlirikoèm, máè feè'shi Nsuñ Mboèñmboñ aèmboè Kraêis, a bár yuu mo' ka'.	in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of God's Spirit; so that from Jerusalem, and around as far as to Illyricum, I have fully preached the Good News of Christ;
Mncir ca aè láè ba beèe, a lá ba aè buu ce vi be cu nfeseè ka'.	(all of which perish with use), according to the precepts and doctrines of men?
Cena yi ka' mïì wáá, Jisoès aè ker duñshi yïì nyor neè ñgaâa yá'ni yïì buu aèwaâa túè Tïìbárïìyaès. E m duèñshi yïì nyor ba aè njáèá enáê.	After these things, Jesus revealed himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. He revealed himself this way.
Yuu ce Nfò ce suŋ na yu ba yuu à tʉʉ ŋgòŋ kaʼ.	What Nfor is talking about is not something, which is nearby.
Yi ku ba aèmboè a sañ enáê, “Ñwáè ce e ka' ce koèñ aè rcu ce yu' rboèñ, ce lu'shi, ñgaèñ fa laèa yuu bebep káè nya' mnde' ka'.	"For, ""He who would love life, and see good days, let him keep his tongue from evil, and his lips from speaking deceit."
Ñwáè aè ka' lá ntee ba aè yuu ce yïì nyor koèñ, baná ñgaèñ be ba ñwáè bbaèa neè Nyúè njobeè' e ce yu'ni neè mncir Nyúè ka'. Neè mini-ñwáè, e moèo aè ryu'ni neè mncir anaè laèr.	because the mind of the flesh is hostile towards God; for it is not subject to God's law, neither indeed can it be.
Seèe lor nfeè' faè dïì' seèe gee yuu mo' ce ntee yi bep Tata Nyúè neè seèe ka'. Waè' seèe túr ñger a caa ye a?	Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
Kraâis ye ye aè m kwe aètu yïìseèe buu bbebep, a ku kwe ñkaèraè' moè'sir caè'caè'. Ye ce e m ba ñwáâ nyáánïì, aè m kwe aètu beèe ce a m ba byáánïì ka', tá e bo loèr seèe fa neè Nyúè. AÈ m ba aè nfeè' ce e m ba aè ñwáè, a yú ye. Nyúè aè ka' fúr ye efa rkwe, e ba aè yú'.	Because Christ also suffered for sins once, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring you to God; being put to death in the flesh, but made alive in the spirit;
E gwàr ye nè sàʼ.	He cut him with a cutlass.
A ka' ye byee mïìsi, e lor ndoñ aèmboè e m loèr bráâd naè, a laa enáê, “Ndoñ ca yu leâ' fi ce Nyúè aè kur a beèe neè wa bláá.	"Likewise, he took the cup after supper, saying, ""This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you."
To wee weèe foñ aè yá a ker yu' yuu ce ñwáè ce a too ená Pol na ce geèe aè rla' Áfásoès, ker ba aè ñgoâñ Ásïìyaè wááwá. Byá anaè aè laèa ená mnyúè ce beèe a kupshi kupshi yu lá mnyúè ka'. E geèe wa'a, a beesi mntee ese beèe magoèr.	You see and hear, that not at Ephesus alone, but almost throughout all Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away many people, saying that they are no gods, that are made with hands.
Yú' ñwáè ce e m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe yi ka' ba njep weèe, baná ñwáè ce e m fúr Jisos Kraâis efa rkwe be geèe foñ tá weêe mnyor ce aètaè vi kweñgeèr na, vi kúti bteèe. E be geèe wa'a aè ñger yi yú' ce yi yu njep weèe naè.	But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up Christ Jesus from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit who dwells in you.
Baná wee weèe foñ aè ka' gee buu wááwá ce a laèa ená weèe geêe, weèe laa weenáê, ‘Weèr ku ba ba ñgaâa mfaè', weèr aè ku gee ba yuu ce weèr aè ba geèe.’ ”	"Even so you also, when you have done all the things that are commanded you, say, 'We are unworthy servants. We have done our duty.'"""
AÈ ka' ba njobeè' beèe a m ce tami nyor ená túè' be raa tá a cu mmbomntaa Nyúè, Josáèf ce aè rla' AÈrimaètiyaè aè du aè mbuèuñkuèr anaè, a du a yá Pailáèt. Josáèf ca aè m ba moè' efa múè ñgaâa kansuèr ce beèe a m ce yu'ni neè ye seê. E m ce keè' nfeè' ce Nyúè be vúè sa' aèmboè ñkúú. E kur ntee a du a yá Pailáèt, a laa ená e fa gúâú ñwáè neè ye tá e tuñ.	When evening had now come, because it was the Preparation Day, that is, the day before the Sabbath, Joseph of Arimathaea, a prominent council member who also himself was looking for the Kingdom of God, came. He boldly went in to Pilate, and asked for Jesus' body.
Mmirloè mi m ce koo Pitaè ba beèe ce a woweèe a m ba naè, a ka' wañ woweèe efa mmïìr boèñboñ, a yá foâo Jisoès, a yá mmbañruè a baa caè aèmboè a táá a Jisoès.	Now Peter and those who were with him were heavy with sleep, but when they were fully awake, they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him.
E ka' mïìsi wáá, a loâ aè rla' Atáèns a du aè rla' Koreèn.	After these things Paul departed from Athens, and came to Corinth.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Weèe túr bráâd yi sá'? Duè fyá' ka neè.” Woweèe a ka' duè fyá', a laa neè ye enáê, “Weèr túr bráâd taê, ba nca baa.”	"He said to them, ""How many loaves do you have? Go see."" When they knew, they said, ""Five, and two fish."""
Bkúr beèe a m loâ aè ñgoâñ Galeèleê, ba aè Mla' Rúêú, ba aè rla' Jáèrusaláèm, ba aè ñgoâñ Juèdiyaè, ba neèñguu Jodaèn, a du a yeâ mbuèu.	Great multitudes from Galilee, Decapolis, Jerusalem, Judea and from beyond the Jordan followed him.
Awá Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Baná weèe aè be riñ mbuèu efa yuu ce m ce laèa ka' a?”	"He asked them, ""Don't you understand, yet?"""
“Bfúr waê, beèe embe ndúè' Abraèham ker ba weèe ce weèe ce wáp Nyúè, a tuusi nsuñ rluèñ ca ba neè seèe.	Brothers, children of the stock of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, the word of this salvation is sent out to you.
Beèe enje jáá ce a rïìñ Nyúè ka' a ke duè yap ba aèmbuèu buu ca, yeè Ta aè rïìñ ená weèe aè ba túr buu ca.	For the nations of the world seek after all of these things, but your Father knows that you need these things.
Fʉm a dìʼ ce a ke bʉsi ŋkʉʉ.	ʼFumʼ is where a chief is buried.
Jisoès aè laa neè woweèe enáê, “Loèr neè nfeè' neè yis beèe Farïìsi ba beèe Saduèsïî.”	"Jesus said to them, ""Take heed and beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees."""
E beesïì enáê, “Masaè, Muu Ñwáè anaè yu nda tá m bo byemi neè ye?”	"He answered, ""Who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?"""
M ce laèa wa'a njobeè' kúú Nyúè yi yu aèmboè ñkúú ce e m ce koèñ aè rfyá' ñwaâ' mñkaa ñgaâa mfaè'.	Therefore the Kingdom of Heaven is like a certain king, who wanted to reconcile accounts with his servants.
Sèe caŋsi muu ca fàdìʼ ŋgǎatʉʼ a bo yʉ zhe kaʼ.	Let us take this child away so that witches should not kill him.
Nyúè aè m fa seèe mncir ba njïì enjep Musïìs, aè ka' ba njïì enjep Jisos Kraêis, seèe aè rïìñ rboâñ Nyúè ba mini Nyúè.	For the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth were realized through Jesus Christ.
Baná m ce koèñ ená weèe riñ ená Yú' Nyúè yi ka' ba njep ñwáè, aède' ñgaèñ laa enáê, “Ndoèo co' Jisoès” ka'. Yú' Nyúè yi ka' tá ba njep ñwáè ka', aède' ñgaèñ laa enáê, “Jisoès yu Tataê” ka'.	"Therefore I make known to you that no man speaking by God's Spirit says, ""Jesus is accursed."" No one can say, ""Jesus is Lord,"" but by the Holy Spirit."
Baná weèe roèo entombïì ba kúú Nyúè, gee ñgeâe yáánïì aèmboè e ce koèñ, tá e fa weèe buu ca wááwá foñ.	But seek first God's Kingdom, and his righteousness; and all these things will be given to you as well.
Rkèp rlisèe rli yû?	Where is our flute?
Mboè Nyúè be sa' mnsa' tá vi ba yáánïì aè mbeèp yïì beèe ce a ce war neè ye neèmootïì ba neètú' foñ a? Waè' aède' e caasïì nfeè' efa rteni wap mnsa' a?	Won't God avenge his chosen ones, who are crying out to him day and night, and yet he exercises patience with them?
E ka' laèa mïìsi, ñwáè Farïìsi moè' aè be ye ená a ye a du yeñger. E du a niñ mbe ndaèp ñwáè anaè a cu aè nsheè a ye a bo yeñger.	Now as he spoke, a certain Pharisee asked him to dine with him. He went in, and sat at the table.
E m laèa enáê, “Suñ neè beâe aè rla' Sayoèn enáê, ‘Yáê, yeè ñkúú ce vúè aè ryá weèe, a ba neè rbornïì-ñwáè, a cu mbenduè muu jaèaki'.’ ”	Tell the daughter of Zion, behold, your King comes to you, humble, and riding on a donkey, on a colt, the foal of a donkey.
Ñwáè moè' efa múè beâe aè to' Kreât anaè, ce e m ce yá buu ce vi be keè ba, aè m laèa enáê, “Beâe aè to' Kreât a yu ñgaâa mnde'. Woweèe a yu aèmboè mnyaèa efa rïìñ wa'a, a ba mñkuñri ce a yu bbor.”	"One of them, a prophet of their own, said, ""Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, and idle gluttons."""
